Behavior of Trading Automata
in a Computerized Double
Auction Market
John Rust
Richard G. Palmer
John H. Miller




SFI WORKING PAPER: 1992-02-008


SFI Working Papers contain accounts of scientific work of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the
views of the Santa Fe Institute. We accept papers intended for publication in peer-reviewed journals or
proceedings volumes, but not papers that have already appeared in print. Except for papers by our external
faculty, papers must be based on work done at SFI, inspired by an invited visit to or collaboration at SFI, or
funded by an SFI grant.

©NOTICE: This working paper is included by permission of the contributing author(s) as a means to ensure
timely distribution of the scholarly and technical work on a non-commercial basis. Copyright and all rights
therein are maintained by the author(s). It is understood that all persons copying this information will
adhere to the terms and constraints invoked by each author's copyright. These works may be reposted only
with the explicit permission of the copyright holder.

www.santafe.edu




                SANTA FE INSTITUTE
Behavior of Trading Automata in a Computerized Double Auction Market


                                           John Rust, University of Wisconsin
                                             Richard Palmer, Duke University
                                       John H. Miller, Carnegie Mellon University
                                                            and
                                                     Santa Fe Institute
                                                 dat@sfi.santafe.edu



                                                  Revised, January, 1992




  Abstract: This paper reports the results of a series of tournaments held at the Santa Fe Institute beginning in March,
  1990 in which computer programs played the roles of buyers and sellers in a simplified synchronized double auction
  market. We show that despite the decentralized nature of the trading process and traders' incomplete information
  about supply and demand, transaction price trajectories for a heterogeneous collection of computer programs typically
  converged to the competitive equilibrium, resulting in allocations that were nearly 100% efficient. We also show that
  a very simple trading strategy is a higWy effective and robust performer in these markets. A simple rule-of-thumb
  was able to outperform more complex algoritllms that used statistically-based predictions of future transaction prices,
  explicit optimizing principles, and sophisticated "learning algorithms".



  Acknowledgements: This paper is forthcoming in Tile Double Auction Ma.rket: Institutions, Tlleories and
  Evidence D. Friedman, J. Geanakoplos, D. Lane and J. Rust (eds.) Addison Wesley, 1992. We are grateful for the
  generosity of the Santa Fe Institute and its Economics program for providing the facilities, salary, administrative,
  and computational support that made this research possible. John Rust is grateful to the Alfred Sloan Foundation for
  providing tournament prize money, and National Science Foundation grants SES-8721 199 for computer hardware, and
  SES-901oo46 for funding of matching human experiments at the Experimental Science Laboratory at the University
  of Arizona (Vernon Smith, Co-PI). International Business Machines provided funding for tournament organizational
  expenses. John Miller would like to acknowledge an equipment grant from Sun Microsystems. The general idea of the
  computerized double auction toumament emerged from discussions in a March 1988 meeting at the Sante Fe Institute,
  including Phil Anderson, Ken Arrow, Brian Arthur, John Holland, Tim Kehoe, Richard Palmer, John Rust, Tom
  Sargent, and Eugenia Singer. We also acknowledge helpful discussions with Robert Axelrod, Charles Plott, Vernon
  Smith, and Shyam Sunder, and extend our tllanks to particular individuals whose expertise made this tournament
  possible, including Michael Angerman, Marcella Austin, Ronda Butler-Villa, Steven Pope, Ginger Richardson, Dan
  Schneidewend, Andi Sutherland, George Tsibouris, and Della Ulibarri. We are grateful for helpful comments from Dan
  Friedman and seminar participants at the Universities of Oslo and Stockholm, and the London School of Economics.
  Finally we would like to thank all participants of tlle DA tournament for tlleir willingness to commit time and effort in
  developing an ingenious collection of trading programs.
1. Introduction

       This paper reports the results of a series of computerized double auctiou tournaments held at the Santa Fe
Institute beginning in March 1990. The tournament cousisted of over 30 computer programs (automata traders)
playing the roles of buyers and sellers in a simplified syncrhonized double-auction (DA) market. The tournament was
organized with several objectives in mind; I) to get new insights on the fonn of effective trading strategies, 2) to
compare the perfonnance of automata traders and human traders, and 3) to create an artificial market to help us better
understand the operation of the "invisible hand" in real world DA markets.

       The remarkable efficiency properties ofDA markets have been documented in numerous laboratory experiments
using human subjects. By assigning subjects tokens with fixed redemption values and token costs, well-defined supply
and demand curves can be constructed. The intersection of these curves defines the price and quantity at which
neoclassical economic theory predicts trading will occur, the competitive equilibrium (CE) solution. The complication
is that in most experimental markets each trader only knows only their own token values: no single trader has enough
infonnation to determine the market supply and demand curves in order to compute the CEo The nearly universal
finding of more than two decades of human experiments is that despite the presence of incomplete information and the
small number of traders , transaction prices and quantities quickly converge to CEo The resulting market allocations are
highly efficient; traders are typically able to exploit close to 100% of the potential profits.

       Although the textbook "supply equals demand" model may provide a good prediction of closing prices and
quantities in DA markets, it fails to explain the dynamics by which this happens. A more sophisticated theory is
required to show how the trading process aggregates traders' dispersed information, driving the market towards CEo
The essence of the problem was clearly stated by Friederik Hayek nearly 50 years ago:

       "The problem is in no way solved if we can show that all the facts, if they were known to a single
       mind, would uniquely determine the solution; instead we must show how a solution is produced by the
       interactions of people each ofwhom possesses only partial knowledge. To assume that all the knowledge
       to be given to a single mind in the same manner in which we assume it to be given to us as the explaining
       economists is to assume the problem away and to disregard everything that is important and significant
       in the real world." (Hayek, 1945, p. 530)


       Since the use of a computer .tournament to gain insights into human trading behavior is somewhat unorthodox,
section 2 briefly reviews current dleories of DA markets. Although these theories have provided important insights
into the nature of tradIng strategies and price formation, it is fair to say that none of them has provided a satisfactory
resolution of "Hayek's problem". In particular, current theories assume a substantial degree of implicit coordination by
requiring that traders have common knowledge of each other's strategies (in game-theoretic models), or by assuming
that all traders use the same strategy (in learning models). Little is known theoretically about price formation in
DA markets populated by heterogeneous traders with limited knowledge of their opponents. Although experimental



                                                              I
                                                                                                                            2

     studies have provided considerable empirical evidence on the nature trading behavior nnder these conditions, they
     have failed to cast light on trading strategies which are essentially unobservable.

            In order to directly observe strategies, we sponsored a tournament in which entrants submitted trading programs
     playing the roles of buyers and sellers in a computerized DA market. To attract good programs we offered $ 10,000
     in prizes, paid out in proportion to trading profits earned by entrants' programs over the course of the tournament.
     In return we obtained a heterogeneous collection of trading programs to populate a unique laboratory for studying
     decentralized price formation. Section 3 describes the rules of the tournament and the structure of our "synchronized
     DA", a modified version of the traditional continuous DA market designed to simplify the task of programming
     strategies and guarantee equal trading opportunities. Section 4 presents the results of the cash tournament held at the
     Santa Fe Institute in March 1990 and subsequent non-cash "scientific" and "evolutionary" tournaments held in 1991.
     We find that the top-ranked programs yield a fairly "realistic" working model of a DA market in the sense that their

.,   collective behavior is consistent with the key "stylized facts" of human experiments. We also find that a very simple
     trading strategy is a highly effective and robust performer in these markets. This strategy was able to outperform more
     complex algorithms that use statistically-based predictions of future transaction prices, explicit optimizing principles,
     or sophisticated "learning algorithms". The basic idea behind the approach can be described quite simply: wait in the
     backgroundand let others do the negotiating, but when bid and ask get sufficiently close,jump in and "steal the deal" .
     However the results of our evolutionary tournaments show that when too many other traders try to imitate this strategy,
     market efficiency can fall precipitously due to negative information externalities. Specifically, if too many traders
     "wait in the background", little infOlmation is generated until just before the end of the trading period. This tends to
     produce "closing panics" as traders rush to unload their tokens in the final seconds of the trading period, resulting in
     failure to execute all potentially profitable transactions.

            Long-run stability in the trading environment seems to require the presence of active bidders that provide a
     flow of information to "lubricate the market". However most of the active bidding strategies seem to be too impatient,
     exposing themselves to a high risk of mistakes and consequent exploitation by the background traders. Although a
     few of the more complex trading programs appear to be resistant to short-run exploitation, none of them appear strong
     enough to resist the parasitic effects of the background traders in the long-run. We show that a market dominated by
     background traders can be "quasi-stable" if a small but steady stream of short-lived "noise-traders" enters the market.
     The noise-traders provide a flow of information and source of new capital to keep the market running despite being
     nearly totally dominated by background traders. However since price volatility is very high in such a market, it is
     likely to present attractive opportunity for exploitation by new strategies. Section 5 concludes with some observations
     on how one might find such strategies.
                                                                                                                                                     3

    2. Review of Previous Approaches to Analyzing DA Markets

            Modern economic theory has attempted to explain the apparent disequilibrium behavior in DA markets as
    actually beiug the equilibrium outcome of a game of incomplete information. The "null hypothesis" is that observed
    trading behavior is a realization of a Bayesian-Nash equilibrium (BNE) of this game. Given the immensity of
    the strategy space (especially in continuous-time formulations), it has proven extremely difficult to characterize the
    equilibria of these games. The clearest characterizations have been obtained by Sattettbwaite and Williams (1989a,b,
    chapter 4) for a class of static DA games known as the k-Double Auction. They have established that truthrellillg is
    nearly a dominant strategy as the number of traders gets large. Unfortunately, this intuition does not appear to carry
    over to dynamic DA markets where truthful revelation is a very poor strategy: if a trader places a bid equal to her true
    redemption value and another trader accepts tl,at bid, the bidder will clearly earn zero profit.

            To the best of our knowledge the only characterization of equilibrium in a dynamic DA market is due to Wilson
    (1987). His equilibrium, described as a "waiting game Dutch Auction" (WGDA) by Cason and Friedman (chapter 8),

            "offers a concrete explanation of the mechanism by which the dispersed information about traders'
            valuations is manifested in the prices at which transactions are consummated. The mechanism, according
            to the present hypothesis, is multilateral sequential bargaining in which the traders are endogenously
            matched for transactions via a signalling process using delay as the primary signal." (p. 412)


            Cason and Friedman (1991) have shown that beyond the prediction of high ex post trading efficiency, almost
    all of the other predictions of Wilson's model are inconsistent with the behavior of hnman traders in laboratory
    experiments. Wilson's model predicts that trade will occur in the efficient order,' whereas in human experiments the
    rank correlation between the order of o'ansactions with the efficient order is typically much less than 100%. Indeed,
    Wilson's model predicts that in equilibrium all ex post efficiency losses will be dne to unrealized intra-marginal trades,
    i.e. the market may trade too few tokens but never too many. However in experimental settings, a significant fraction
    of efficiency losses are due extra-marginal trades. This is due to the fact that in human experiments, bnyers and
    sellers are not matched for transactions as predicted by Wilson's waiting game equilibrium: it is frequently the case
    that extra-marginal traders succeed in "bumping" intra-marginal traders.::l Furthennore, bidding behavior seems to
    be poorly described as a sequence of Dutch auctions called exclusively by the current bidder or asker. In human
    experiments there is often stiff competition for the "right" to hold the the current bid or ask, which is frequently
    "stolen" by other more eager traders. Finally, Cason and Friedman show that in human experiments transaction price


1   The efficient order is the trade sequence which maximizes surplus, Le. the first trade occurs between the buyer with the highest redemption value
    and the seller with the lowest token cost, the second trade occurs between the buyer and seller with the next most valuable tokens, and so on.


~ This suggests that differences in traders' "impatience" may also be a function of other factors we might call "aggressiveness" (or "stupidity"?)
    which may have no direct relation to the magnitude of their token values.
                                                                                                                                                    4

changes are significantly negatively autocorrelated. Wilson's model predicts zero autocorrelation in price changes
since equilibrium transaction prices must follow a martingale to preclude intertemporal arbitrage.

         Given enough freedom in the specification of traders' beliefs and risk aversion, Ledyard (1986) has shown
that essentially any set of undominated strategy profiles can be "rationalized" as a BNE outcome of the DA trading
 game. Does this imply that game theory will eventually be able to provide an explanation for the experimental
 observations? We think there is a deeper reason why the game-tlleoretic approach may not yield a good model of
 human behavior. The problem is that the common knowledge underpinnings of game theoretic models presume an
 unreasonably high degree of implicit coordination amongst the traders, begging Hayek's question ofho,,:, coordination
 is achieved in a decentralized market in the first place. Game theory also assumes that there is no a priori bound on
 traders' ability to compute their BNE strategies. However even traders with infinite, costless computing capacities
 may still decide to deviate from their BNE strategies if they believe that limitations of other traders force them to use
 sub-optimal strategies. Since traders can only observe behavior, they will never be certain of exactly which strategies
 their opponents are using. This learning problem is of such a high dimensionality relative to the limited number
 of observations available within typical trading periods that it may not pay to try to adopt a sophisticated Bayesian
 updating strategy.' Game-theoretic solutions can also be "non-robust" in the sense that they depend critically on
 particular common knowledge assumptions about the fonn of the probability distribution of traders' token values.
 Typically game theorists use the "independent private values model" where each trader's tokens are lID draws from
 a fixed distribution F. It is not known whether equilibria will be substantially different if token values are correlated
 across traders. To our knowledge, there is no convincing evidence from the experimental literature that presence or
 absence ofcommon knowledge about the joint distribution oftoken values has a significant impact on trading outcomes.
 Indeed, subjects in most experimental studies are not given any infonnation about how tokens are generated. In a
 game-theoretic model it would be impossible to even define the concept of equilibrium without such prior infonnation.

          In response to the difficulties of using game theory to analyze and explain experimental findings in dynamic DA
. markets, economists have begun to fonnulate explicit disequilibrium trading theories based on simple, yet plausible
 rules-of-thumb. Examples of this approach include Easley and Ledyard (chapter 3), Friedman (1991), and Garcia
 (1980). The results of tllCse studies suggest that rationality is not a necessary condition for observing efficient
 outcomes and convergence to CE in DA·markets. Gode and Sunder (1992, and chapter 6) provided a particularly
 striking demonstration of this result. They showed that markets populated by "Zero Intelligence" (ZI) strategies exhibit
 very high ex post efficiencies, and the corresponding price trajectories frequently converged to CE in Ihe very first


3 It has been shown (Freedman, 1963; Diaconis and Freedman, 1986) that Bayesian updating can be inconsistent in infinite-dimensional parameter
 spaces. In certain cases the prior distribution can completely overwhelm the data in the sense that the posterior will not converge to the "truth" even
 given an infinite number of observations. Intuitively, this will also be the case when the dimensionality of the object being learned is large relative
 to the number of observations.
                                                                                                                                                       5

     trading period. A ZI seller with token cost C asks an amount C + U, where U is uniformly distributed over its support
     S. Similarly a Zl buyer with redemption value R bids amount R -                       U. At each step t of trading, a ZI trader uses lID
     draws U to construct its bids and asks, accepting the first profitable opposing bid or ask that comes along. Thus, ZI
     are traders are "minimally rational" in the sense that they do not attempt to optimize or learn from past observations,
     although they do avoid trading at a loss by always bidding below their redemption values or asking above their token
     costs. Gode and Sunder (1992) found that in markets populated entirely by ZI traders allocations were nearly 100%
     efficient outcomes and price trajectories typically converged to CE, provided the support of the set over which random
     draws U are taken is not too large.' These findings strongly suggest that the nice properties of DA markets may have
     more to do with the properties of the institution itself than the rationality of traders per se.'

             Although ZI traders may be collectively rational, there is a clear sense in which they are individually irrational.
     Specifically, we show that ZI traders, like Truthtellers, will be rapidly exterminated by even slightly more aggressive
     trading strategies. For this reason it seems doubtful that ZI traders will provide a good model of human trading
     behavior. Indeed, even though the price trajectories frequently converge to equilibrium, overall price volatility in DA
     markets populated by ZI traders is unrealistically high. Given the high transaction price volatility, it is somewhat
     surprising that ZI traders are even collectively rational. However if tile support S of the distribution over which the ZI
     traders' bids and offers are randomized is too large, the probability increases that extra-marginal traders will succeed
     in "bumping" intra-marginal traders, resulting in significant efficiency losses. Truthtelling can be viewed as a limiting
     form of the ZI strategy as the support S converges to {O}. Since trade in a syncronized DA market populated entirely
     by truthtellers is necessarily fully efficient, it follows that ZI traders are also close to 100% efficient, at least when the
     upper support S is sufficiently small.'

              One of the lessons from Axelrod's (1984) prisoner's dilemma tournament is that sometimes players can be "too
     smart for their own good" in the sense that sophisticated and self-interested behavior can be deterimental to achieving
     good cooperative outcomes. The question is whether this is true in DA markets as well. Is it the case that sophisticated
     optimizing strategies make individual traders better off, but reduce market efficiency? The problem is that "passive"


4 The key restriction is to rule out placing bids or asks al a loss, which is true provide the support S is nonnegative. The nature of the trading rules
  also affect the results. ZI traders in continuous-time markets yield less efficient allocations than in continouNime markets than in the sychronized
  DA markets described in section 3, since they are able to place an unbounded number of bids and asks in the fonner. For details, see Oode and
     Sunder. chapter 6.

.S   We should also mention related work by Marimon, McGrarten and Sargent (1990) who studied the behavior of a collection of HoIland's (1975)
     classifier systems in a dynamic exchange economy. Although their economy is a more complicated dynamic market than the essentially static DA
     market studied here (in particular it can have multiple isolated equilibria), they also found that their artificial agents eventually converged to an
     equilibrium of the system.

6    To the extent that humans sometimes make random mistakes, ZI traders may provide insight into why static sealed-bid DA markets are less efficient
     than dynamic DA markets. For example in the "~-double auction, the level of inefficiency appears to be much more sensitive to the level of
     underbidding (as indexed by the size of the support 5) than it is in a dynamic DA.
                                                                                                                                                      6

     or "nice" strategies (such as Trutheller or ZI) that are consistent with high collective efficiency may be individually
     unsustainable in the presence of aggressive players. The issue turns on the potential gains from behaving aggressively
     versus behaving passively. We suspect that an analog of the Satterthwaite-Williams result canies over to dynamic DA
     markets: namely, that the gains from behaving strategically are negligible even in markets with very small numbers of
     traders. However in order to define the gains to behaving strategically we also have to define an appropriate notion of
     what it means to behave passively or "non-strategically". Identifying non-strategic behavior with truthtelling will not
     work in dynamic DA markets since truthtelling, like ZI, is easily exploitable. 10 a large and efficient market there is
     reasonably well-defined notion of pricetaking behavior: namely, placing all bids or asks at the market price and only
     accepting a bid or offer that is at least as good as the market price. In an efficient market it seems intuitively clear that
     pricetaking should be close to a dominant strategy.' However it is less clear exactly what it means to be a pricetaker
     in thin markets with small numbers of traders where initial transaction prices are highly volatile and potentially far
     from equilibrium, a situation that is typical of the first few periods of most experimental DA markets, as well as many
     markets observed in the field.


     3. Structure of the DA Tournament

             Most of the trading programs used in this study were submitted in response to advertisements for a "Double
     Auction Tournament" held at the Santa Fe 10stitute in March 1990. Cash prizes totalling $10,000 were offered to
     a maximum of 100 entrants in proportion to the trading profits earned by their programs· over the course of the
     tournament. 10 addition to prize money and wide publicity, a substantial effort was devoted to make the programming
     and debugging of trading strategies as easy as possible. This included development of the Sallta Fe Token Exchange
     (SFTE) which opens at the start of each hour for token trading over the worldwide Internet computer network.'

              The computerized DA was implemented via a message-passing protocol which specifies the form of allowable
     messages that programs can send, such as bids, asks, and buy and sell orders. Entrants were provided with a simple
     "skeleton" trading program (written in C, Fortran, and Pascal) which handled all the message-passing housekeeping,
     allowing them to focus on the logic of their strategies, rather than on programming details. A central monitor program
     coordinates the trading process by communicating with all of the trading programs, executing their buy and sell orders
     and relaying their bids and asks to the other traders. Trading programs (which could also be interfaces to human


"7   Roberts and Postlewaite (1976) were the first to fonnally establish such a result in the context of a static complete-information Walrasian exchange
     economy. The results of SW (19&9a,b) and RSW (1990) cited in section 2 can be interpreted as an extension of the Roberts-Postlewaite result to a
     non-Wairasian exchange economy with incomplete infonnation.

8 Many entrants reponed that the SFTE was useful for refining their trading programs in advance of the actual tournament.           We also distributed
     "free-ware" to allow entrants who did not have Internet access to set up their own local token exchanges.
                                                                                                                                                        7

  traders) communicate only with the monitor and not directly with each other as illustrated in figure 3.1. It is important
  to note that the monitor program is only a clerk: it is not an "auctioneer" and has no market-clearing authority. 9




                                           Figure 3.1: Interplayer Communication Via the Monitor



              The structure of our computerized DA market is very similar to the continuous-time experimental DA markets
  described in section 2. The major differences are 1) time is discretized into alternating Bid/Ask (BA) and Buy/Sell (BS)
  steps, and 2) transactions are cleared according to "AURORA rnles". The DA market opens with a BA step in which
  all traders are allowed to simultaneously post bids and asks. After the monitor informs the traders of each others' bids
  and asks, the holders of the current bid (highest outstanding bid) and current ask (lowest outstanding ask) enter into
  a BS step." During the BS step, either player can accept the other player's bid or ask. If an acceptance occurs, a
  transaction is executed. U A trading period is simply a set of S alternating BA and BS steps.

              The discretization of time was adopted to simplify the programming of trading strategies and improve the
  synchronization of communications between players and the monitor in a multiprocessing or network computing
  environment where delays may vary from player to player and moment to moment. In a continuous-time enviromnent
  "faster" traders have an inherent advantage. This speed advantage may arise due to communication delays (e.g.,
  simultaneous messages sent from a trader in Japan and Chicago may arrive at different times at a central computer in
  New York) or due to processing delays (e.g., machines may be able to recognize and respond to certain conditions faster
  than humans). By discretizing time and setting sufficiently wide response-time limits, we can effectively guarantee
  that all traders have equal trading opportunities. In the limit, our implementation of a discrete-time DA market is


 9 The monitor does enforce trading rules, and can impose upper and lower price limits,       It also has the authority to censor illegal or late messages,
  although no cpu-time limits were imposed in the actual tournament.

10 If a current bid (ask) does not exist, then aU buyers (sellers) enter into the BS step.



11 If both   parties accept each other's offers, the monitor randomly chooses between the current bid and ask to determine the transaction price.
                                                                                                                                            8

   not restrictive since a continuous-time trading environment can be arbitrarily well approximated by a discrete-time
       environment with very many short trading intervals. 12

               The AURORA rules were inspired by similar rules used by the AURORA computerized trading system
       developed by the Chicago Board of Trade. AURORA Rules stipulate that only the holder of the current bid or current
       ask are allowed to trade. We adopted these rules as a substitute for ad hoc tie-breaking rules which are necessary in
       discrete-time trading environment when several traders are able to simultaneously accept an outstanding bid or ask.
       Presumably the Chicago Board of Trade had a very different motivation for considering the AURORA rules. ". In
       our case, we experimented with alternative sets of trading rules and found that the AURORA rules produced a more
       interesting DA game, as well as one that was perceived as "fairer" by participants. Strategically, our DA breaks into
       a series of two simultaneous move subgames: a multiplayer game to acquire the current bid or ask in a BA step, and
       a two-player game involving a binary accept/reject decision in a BS step. In early human experiments using random
       tie-breaking rather than AURORA rules, we found that traders often expressed frustration that trade execution seemed
       more a matter of luck than strategy due to tlle fact that other traders would repeatedly win random tie-breaks for the
       acceptance of an outstanding bid or ask. On the otller hand, one might criticize the AURORA rules on the grounds
       that it makes it harder for traders to remain in the background since it forces them to "show their hand" by posting a
       winning bid or ask before being allowed to trade. We have found, however, that these rules do not place a significant
       constraint on background traders: they can still stay quietly in the background for most of the trading period, Jumping
       in the moment they detect an attractive bid or ask. Indeed, this is precisely the strategy followed by the winner of the
       tournament.

               An individual DA game is divided into one or more rounds, and each round is further divided into one or more
       periods. A single period of the DA game consists of a fixed number of alternating BA and BS steps as described above.
       The reason for structuring games to have multiple rounds and periods within rounds is to control players' abilities to
       learn about their opponents. Tokens and redemption values are fixed within each period of a given round, but are
       allowed to change between rounds. Thus DA games with many periods allow players to learn the value of each others'
       tokens, while DA games with many rounds allow players to learn about each others' strategies.

               At the start of a DA game the monitor broadcasts public information to the traders, including tlle number of
       buyers and sellers and their identities, the number of rounds, periods and time steps, the number of tokens each agent
       will have, and the joint distribution F from which the traders' token values are drawn. Next, the monitor sends each
       trader a packet of private information, namely, their realized token values. Since public information is provided by


1::1   The same point applies to price units in our DA market, which were rounded to the nearest integer.

13 Since AURORA rules have the effect of making all transactions publicly observable, they may have been designed partly in response to trading

       abuses that were uncovered in the Chicago Exchanges in the late 1980's.
                                                                                                                                                        9

  a simultaneous broadcast to all players, it serves as a means of ensuring that players have common knowledge about
      all relevant game parameters. The joint distribution F was communicated to players using a four digit gametype
  variable. Token values are represented by Tjk where j indexes the trader, and k indexes the token assigned to the
      trader. Tokens are randomly generated according to

                                                                                           if j is a buyer;
                                                                                                                                                   (3.1)
                                                                                           if j is a seller,

      where" A ~ U[O,RI], B ~ U[0,R2], Ck ~ U[0,R3], andDjk ~ U[O,14]. Notice that when RI                                          = R2 = R3 = 0
      we have the standard independent private-values model where tokens are independently uniformly distributed on the
      interval [0. R4]. A gametype equal to 0 indicates an environment where redemption values were generated by an
      unspecified process.

              The best way to understand what goes on in a DA market is to study the monitor output for the sample
      tournament game in Figure 3.2. The figure shows the first period of a DA game with two rounds and three periods per
      round. In this case there are four buyers and four sellers, and each trader is assigned four tokens. The implied supply
      and demand curves give a CE which is uniquely determined with a price of 691 at a quantity of II. " The '+' next
      to each trader's token indicates an intra-marginal token, a '-' indicates an extra-marginal token, and an '=' denotes a
      token value equal to the CE price. The first BA step yields a current bid of 435 held by B I (buyer I) and a current ask
      of 1128 held by S2 (seller 2). Neither BI nor S2 choose to accept the other's bid or ask at BS step I, so the bidding
      b!,gins'again at BA step 2. The first transaction occurs in BS step 4 when both B3 and SI simultaneously accept each
      other's offers. Here, a random tie-break results in S3 seIling its first token (denoted by capital A) at B3's bid of 717.
      Immediately after the transaction the current bid and ask are set to zero and a new BA step starts up in period 5. The
      game continues this way until the final BS step is reached in step 25. The box at the end of the monitor output provides
      a summary of the period's trading activity: tllere were 10 transactions yielding a total profit of 604, which is 91 % of the
      total surplus of 663. In this case tl,e source of tl,e inefficiency was due to two events. First, one intra-marginal trade
      was not consummated. Second, there were two extra-marginal trades made by B3 which displaced an equal number of
      intra-marginal trades. This example illustrates a typical feature of efficiency losses in dynamic DA markets, namely
      the coexistence of extra-marginal trades along with unconsummated intra-marginal trades. 16


14 Each ofthe 4 digits of the gametype variable.correspond to {RI , ... , R4} according to the base·3 coding, R, = 3"(') - 1 where h( i) is the ith digit
   of gametype.

III   The discrete nature oftbe market often implies that a non-unique equilibrium point emerges, in which case an equilibrium range of either prices or
      quantities results.

16    The monitor output contains a number of other symbols. @ denotes a bid equal to the current bid, X and Y denotes a bid below the current bid and
      the minimum allowed price, respectively (both illegal), and Z denotes a bid above the maximum allowed price. $ denotes a bid above the current
      ask (and current bid), & denotes a bid above the current ask but not current bid, '" denotes a token traded at a loss, and! denotes a crossing of the
      current bid and ask.
                                                                                                              10

DA game 1       Fri May 24 02:14:05 1991

protocol:               5        monitor:            443     gametype:         6453
nrounds:                2        nperiods:             3     ntimes:             25
minprice:               1        maxprice:          2000     ntokens:             4
rani:                 728        ran2:                80     ran3:              242
ran4:                  26        deadsteps:          100     timeout:            30
id   name                        id name
     ------------                      ----------
Bl   silverbuffalo               51    burchard
B2   staecker                    52    pricetaker
B3   perry                       53    breton
B4   anon2                       S4    anderson
+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
                                             Round    1. period 1
+-------+-------------------------+-------------------------+----------------+
I token I        Bl     B2             B3    B4        Sl      S2    S3        S4         Equilibrium
+-------+-------------------------+-------------------------+----------------+
     a          754+    760+          761+   751+     651+    666+   646+     661+        691 to 691
     b          722+    708+          717+   719+     661+    675+   659+     665+        av:     691.0
     c          691=    705+          690-   702+     680+    683+   680+     693-        trades: 11
     d          681-    678-          689-   691=     779-    776-   788-     774-
+-------+-------------------------+----------------~--                        ------+----------------+
It   stepl       81         82         83     84       51      52     53       54      I cbid coff price I
+-------+-------------------------+-------------------------+----------------+
11   BA     I   435*    276           368    345     1550    1128* 1182       1999       435 1128
I    BSI                                                                                 435 1128
12 BA I                 440           574*           1127    1090    966* 1065           574 966
I    Bsl                                                                                 574 966
13 BA I          ~      579           676*            803*    942    827       930       676 803
I    BSI                                                                                 676 803
14 BA I          ~      681           717*            652$    793    770       791       717 652
I    BSI                               a>A             a>A                                              717
15 BA I                 216           606*   345     1075     713*   957      1999        606    713
I    Bsl                                                                                  606    713
16 BA I          ~      611           635*            661*    712     X        703        635    661
I    Bsl                                                                                  635    661
17 BA I          ~      640           642*                           656*                 642    656
I    BSI                               b<B                               <A                             656

123 BA I                557                  651*             778    681   666*           651    666
1     BSI                                     c<C                            <B                         666
124 BA I                232                  550*     809            681* 1999
                                                                            550                   681
I     Bsl                                                                   550                   681
125 BA I                596                  651*                        "651                     681
I     Bsl                                                                   651                   681
+-------+-------------------------+-------------------------+-----Market-----+
ITrades I       1/2     2/3           4/2    3/3      3/3     3/3    2/3       2/2              20/21
IProfit I        27      48           125    117      141      62     45        39               604
IEqlbrm I        94     100            96     99       81      49     88        56               663
]Effncy I        29%     48%          130%   118%     174%    127%    51Y.      70Y.              91%
+-------+-------------------------+-------------------------+----------------+

                                         Figure 3.2: Sample Monitor Output
                                                                                                                   11

                                            0                   Environment
              Parameter
                                  BASE BBBS      BSSS    EQL    LAD    PER     SHRT    SM!..   RAN    TOK
                 garnetype        6453    6453   6453       0      0   6453    6453    6453    0007   6453
                 rninprice           1       1      1       1      1      1       1       1       1      1
              maxprice            2000    2000   2000    2000   2000   2000    2000    2000    3000   2000
                 nbuyers             4       6      2       4      4      4       4       2       4      4
                 nsellers            4       2      6       4      4      4       4       2       4      4
                 ntokens             4       4      4       4      4      4       4       4       4      1
                 nrounds             2       2      2       2      2      6       2       2       2      2
                 nperiods            3       3      3       3      3      1       3       3       3      3
                 ntimes             75      50     50      75     75     75      25      50      50     25
                 games            1624    1624   1624    1624   1624   1624    1624    3428    1624   1624
                 games/player       56      56     56      56     56     56      56     112      56     56
                 periods/player    336     336    336     336    336    336     336     336     336    336
                 conversion
                 ratio (xIO-')     6.11   8.95    9.73   3.48   3.57    6.97    7.04    6.32   1.04   20.6


                                           Table 3.1: DA Trading Environments


       Tournament entrants were told that their programs would be placed in an unspecified number of alternative
envi~onme/lts.    Each environment is a complete specification of all relevant parameters of the DA game listed in
Table 3.1. Participants were told potential ranges for each of the parameters, but were not given any specific advance
information about how the actual environments would be selected. The actual DA tournament consisted of playing a
large number of DA games in ten separate environments presented in Table 3.1. Each of the ten environments were
allocated $1,000 prize money, and separate conversion factors were calculated to translate token profits into dollar
earnings. 11,e conversion factor c(i) for environment i is the ratio 1000/TS(i), where TS(i) is the total surplus
available in environment i. Due to the lack of 100% efficiency, actual dollar payments in the tournament amounted to
$8,937. Overall, we ran a total of2,233 games in the 10 separate environments, comprising 13,398 individual periods
of play.

       One can see from Table 3.1 that the tournament subjected programs to a wide range of trading conditions. The
base case (BASE), was an environment similar to the one used in pre-tournament trials at the SFTE. Other environments
include duopoly and duospony (BBBS and BSSS), a degenerate surplus distributions where all players receive the
same token values shifted by a common random constant (EQL), an independent private values environment where
each trader's token is an lID draw from a uniform distribution (RAN), a single-period environment that prevented
players from learning from previous market outcomes (PER), a "high-pressure" environment where the traders' time

allotment was very short (SHRT), and an environment where each trader was only assigned a single token (TOK).
OUf intention was to force programs to compete under a broad range of conditions in order to provide a rigorou·s and
comprehensive test of their effectiveness.
                                                                                                                                                 12

             To insure that tournament earnings were not due to a series of lucky token draws, we developed a sampling
 scheme that guaranteed that all trading programs had equal surplus endowments with probability 1." Once a random
     set of token values was drawn according to the sampling scheme given in (3.1), trading programs were randomly
     selected to play in a set of N games (where N = 30 is the total number of entrants) subject to the constraints that no
     program played a copy of itself in the same game and all programs played all positions (BI, B2, Sl, S2, etc.) anequal
     number of times. After this set of N games was completed, the scheme was repeated with a new set of token values.
     It follows that the differences in the trading profits earned by the traders can be ascribed to differences in their trading
     ability, since each program received the same endowment of tokens and encountered roughly the same collection of
     opponents in a large number of replications of the DA game.


     4. Results of DA Tournaments

             We received thirty programs for the first (cash) tournament held in March, 1990. Table 4.1 summarizes the
     entries, listed by the name of the participant(s) who submitted tile pr?gram." Of the thirty entries, fifteen were
     from economists, nine from computer scientists, three from mathematicians, and the remaining three were from an
     investment broker, a professor of marketing, and a joint entry from two cognitive scientists. Three of the entries were
     outgrowths of research papers describing formal models of DA trading behavior." Several of the entries emerged
     from working groups which co-developed sets of strategies, in some cases pre-testing them in "local tournaments"
     using our double auction software. These groups include seven entries from the Economic Science Lab (ESL) at
     the University of Arizona, three from the University of Minnesota, and two each from the University of Colorado
     (Economics) and Carnegie Mellon University (Computer Science). The table also includes four entries from SF!
     including the Zl, Truthtelling and Pricetaking strategies discussed in section 2, as well as a "skeleton" strategy
     provided to entrants as a simple example of a working trading program. Due to potential conflict of interest none of
     the latter programs were entered in the cash tournament held in March 1990 although tiley were used as experimental
     controls in subsequent "scientific toumaments". All of the entrants programmed their strategies by replacing the
     bid/ask and buy/sell subroutines of the skeleton program with their own code. Although versions of the skeleton
     program were available in C, Fortran, and Pascal, almost all of the entries (26 out of 30) were programmed in C. Only
     two were written in Fortran, and two in Pascal.


17   In the case of two trading programs that were only progranuned to play one side of the market, a Skeleton stand-in trader was substituted in the
     games they refused to play. There are slight variations in actual token endowments caused by the fact that one program occasionally "died" midway
     through a trading period. resulting in forfeiture of its potential surplus in the remaining periods of the game.

IS   In cases where trading programs were developed by teams of individuals and we were unable to determine the primary author. we substituted a
     program nickname supplied by the authors. We also received two anonymous entries.

19   The Kennet-Friedman entry is based on Friedman's (1991) model of DA trading as a Bayesian game against nature (BGAN), and the Ledyard-Olson
     entry is based on Easley and Ledyard's model described in Chapter 3.
                                                                                                                        13

       We found that the most useful way of comprehending the variety of strategies in Table 4.1 was to classify them
along the following dimensions:


                                             simple vs. complex
                                             adaptive vs. non-adaptive
                                             predictive vs. non-predictive
                                             stochastic vs. non-stochastic
                                             optimizing vs. non-optimizing.


       Rust, Palmer and Miller (1992) describe how these categories are defined and provide a detailed analysis of
individual trading programs. In general we found that although there was a substantial range in program complexity, the .
majority of the programs appeared to encode the entrant's "market intuition" using simple rules of thumb. Since these
rules are "hardwired", most of the programs are also classified as non-adaptive. Exceptions include a neural network
program submitted by cognitive scientists Dallaway and Harvey, and an "adaptive cellular curvefitter" submitted by
mathematician Paul Burchard. Besides their private information about token values, most of the programs relied on
only small number of public information variables, the current bid, ask, and elapsed time being the most important.
Only 10 programs made use of the prior information about the distribution of of token values provided by the
gametype variable. Although 20 programs made use of the number of buyers and sellers in the DA game, only two
programs (Ledyard-Olson andStaecker) used this information in an explicit way, e.g. by including separate "monopoly
subroutines". Most of the programs did not attempt to keep track of the behavior of individual opponents or make
statistical predictions of future market quantities. An exception was the program of Mark Staecker, developed as
part of a senior honors thesis at the University of Western Ontario, which predicted the next high bid, low ask and
equilibrium price using market-level statistics from previous periods. Based on these predictions, Staecker's program
decides if a transaction is likely to occur at the next BS step and if so, uses its predictions to place an "atractive" bid
or ask in the next BA step.

       The top-ranked program was submitted by economist Todd Kaplan of the University of Minnesota. It was one
of the shortest programs submitted, and is classified as simple, non-adaptive, non-predictive, non-stochastic, and non-
optimizing. The second-ranked program was submitted by computer scientist Mark Ringuette from Carnegie-Mellon
University. Despite the fact that they were independently developed, both strategies are remarkably similar. The
strategies can be described in one line as wait in the background and let the others do the negotiating, but when bid
and ask get sufficiently close,jump in· and steal the deal. These programs succeed in "stealing the deal" by bidding
an amount greater than or equal to the previous current ask. Ringuette's program differs from Kaplan's by randomly
overbidding th~ previous current ask. When time is running out or when a long time has elapsed since making its last
trade..Ringuette's program defaults to a modified version of the Skeleton bidding strategy whereas Kaplan's program
                                                                                                                                                  14

     places a bid equal to the smaller of the current ask or its current token value. In practice this implies that Kaplan's
     program eventually defaults to Truthtelling mode when confronting patient opponents who delay making "serious"
     bids and asks.


     4.1 Results or Mareh 1990 Tournament


             Table 4.2 presents the dollar payoffs earned by the eligible trading programs in the March 1990 tournament,
     broken down by environment." The top program, Kaplan, earned a total of $408, $14 higher than the second place
     program of Ringuette. The gaps separating tllird, fourth and fifth place were $7.45, $10.51 and $8.63, respectively.
     While these differences in earnings may not seem economically significant, they are statistically very significant.
     Kaplan's earnings are over 2.5 standard deviations higher than Ringuette's second place earnings, and tl,e gaps
     separating first from second, third, and fourth places are 3.8, 5.6 and 7.1 standard deviations, respectively. The average
     standard deviation in profits of $5.75 was only slightly higher than the $5.40 standard deviation in surplus allocations,
     calculated over 3,360 individual 'p~riods of play in the 10 environments. Recall that our procedure for generating
     tournament games guarantees that the token endowments of all traders are identical Witll probability I. Given the large
     number of periods of play, an appeal to the law of large numbers allows us to be very confident that differences in
     traders' earnings reflect true differences in profitability rather than randomness due to player matchings and stochastic
     elements in the programs themselves.

             The player rankings are also highly consistent acrOss the 10 environments. The average Spearnlan rank
     correlation between overall tournament payoffs and payoffs in each of the 10 environments is 77%, ranging from a
     high of 95% in environment SML to a low of 72% in environment TOK. Kendall's W-statistic, which measures the
     degree of concordance in all the rankings, is highly significant at 79%, allowing us to easily reject the hypothesis that
     player rankings in different environments are independent. It is striking that Kaplan's program took first place in 7
     out of 10 environments, coming in second place in environment EQL and third place in environment SHRT. The only
     place where Kaplan's program did not do well was the environment TOK where traders were endowed with only a
     single token. At the bottom end of the spectrum, the BGAN (Bayesian game against nature) program of Friedman and
     Kennet was consistently one of the worst performers in all ten environments. With earnings of $164.30 the EGAN is
     over 10 standard deviations below the earnings or the next highest competitor. "


:W The NN program of Dallaway and Harvey was disqualified from the March 1990 tournament because it consistently incurred large losses. The
     authors submitted a revised version for the subsequent scientific tournament which perfonned satisfactorily.

21   BGAN may have suffered as a result of problems convening the program from PC Turbo Pascal to Sun Pascal. Although the converted program
     compiles without error, its numerical integration routines generate under- and overflow elTors at runtime suggesting a possible incompatibility in
     its calls to certain functions. The low dollar ranking of the program of Balcer should be disregarded since the program was only programmed to
     play the role of seller. In terms of dollar payoffs per game played, Balcer's program is about equivalent in performance to the programs Max and
     Terminafor which placed 1011, and 20'" in overall earnings.
                                                                                                                     15

AllthorlNickname               Institution                    F       L      C    A      S      P     0        CPU
Anon-!                         Anonymous                     CS       C            2            I               86
Anon-2                         Anonymous                     CS       C            3            I               89
Jacobson                   .   Carnegie Mellon               CS       C            3     X      I               86
Ringuette                      Carnegie Mellon               CS       C            2     X      I               85
Golden Buffalo                 Colorado                      E       C             2     X      2               88
Silver Buffalo                 Colorado                      E       C             2     X      2               88
Lin                            Portland State                E        C            2     X      I               89
Perry                          Portland State               M         C            3     X      2               88
Anderson                       Minnesota                    E         C            2            I               88
Breton                         Minnesota                    E         C            3     X      I               88
Bromiley                       Minnesota                    MK        F            2            I               90
Kaplan                         Minnesota                    E         C            3            I               86
Pricetaker                     SFI                          EM        C            2     X       I              88
Skeleton                       SFI                          EM        C            2     X      I               84
Truthteller                    SF!                          EM        C            I            I               84
ZI                             SFI                          EM        P            1     X      1               82
Exp                            Arizona ESL                   E        C            2            2               86
Free                           Arizona ESL                   E        C            2            2               87
Gamer                          Arizona ESL                   E        C            1             I              84
Max                            Arizona ESL                   E        C      X     2            2      X       157
Max-R                          Arizona ESL                   E        C      X     2            2     X        261
Slide                          Arizona ESL                   E        C            2     X      2     X         96
Terminator                     Arizona ESL                   E        C            2            2               89
Bolcer                         UC Irvine                    CS        P            2            2               86
Burchard                       Princeton lAS                M         C      X     5     X      2     X         99
Dallaway/Harvey                Sussex                       CS        C      X     5            1     X         91
Kennet/Friedman                Tulane/UCSC                  E         P      X     2            2     X        181
Kindred                        Duke                          CS       C            2     X      I               89
Ledyard/Olson                  Cal Tech                      E        C      X     3     X      2              187
Leinweber                      MIT Advisors                  B        C            2     X      I               87
Lee                            British Columbia              CS       C            2     X      I               88
Staecker                       Western Ontario              CS        C      X     3            2     X         88
Utgoff                         Massachusetts                CS        C            2     X      2               86
Wendroff/Rose                  Los Alamos NL                M         F            3            2               88

Legelld:

     F   Field-B '" broker, CS '" eomplller science, E = economics, M = malh, physics, MK    =marketing.
     L   Programming Language-e, F = Fortran, P = Pascal.
   e     Complex-X if program is MCQmplex" as defined in4.L
   A Adaptive-5 Mlevel ranking defined in section 4.2: l=least adaptive, 5=most adaptive
     S   SlochaSlic-X if program makes use of random number gellerator.
   o     Optimizlrtg-X if program uses an explicit optimization principle.
     P   Predictive-3-level ranking defined in section 4.4: 1= doesn't predict, 2=predicts market variables.
 CPU Ratio of CPU time con~urr.~tion to average for all programs.


                    Table 4.1: Taxonomy of DA Trading Programs
                                                                                                                         16

                 Trading program     Overall    BASE   BBBS   B8BS   LAD    EQL    PER    RAN    SHRT   SML    TOK
                 Kaplan                408       42     42     41    43      42    44       41    38     42    33
                 Ringuette             394       41     37     40    45      38    40       37    33     37    46
                 Staecker              387       41     39     37    43      36    41       35    35     38    42
                 Anon-2                376      .33     36     40    40      39    33       34    39     36    46
                 Ledyard               367       34     38     37    38      36    36       35    35     37    41
                 Perry                 366       34     41     36    40      36    32       38    35     35    40
                 Breton                360       35     33     37    36      37    35       37    35     37    40
                 Anderson              358       33     39     38    34      37    31       36    38     35    39
                 Anon-!                354       36     37     35    36      35    37     . 35    35     35    32
                 Burchard              344       34     35     34    34      34    35      39     36     34    28
                 Terminator            342       35     27     40    36      34    36      33     31     32    38
                 Golden Buffalo        340       34     35     35    35      35    32      37     34     30    33
                 Lee                   337       33     34     32    35      35    35      37     35     36    27
                 Leinweber             333       34     34     32    39      36    32      36     35     34    22
                 Silver Buffalo        330       34     30     32    33      38    36      33     33     25    37
                 Slide                 330       35     34     32    34      33    36      32     33     32    29
                 Jacobson              329       34     28     34    31      37    31      32     32     30    39
                 Bromiley              316       32     31     35    30      33    35      31     31     25    32
                 Max                   299        31    32     33     30     28    32      25      22    32    34
                 Max-R                 294        2S    34     29    31      27    30      26      25    29    35
                 Utgoff                286       32     26     25    32      35    32      25     26     29    23
                 Kindred               271       30     24     33    32      34    31      30     27     25     4
                 Free                   242       27    32     21     23      25   21      27      27     22    17
                 Gam",                  230       25     20    22     24      24    25     21      25    21     22
                 Wendroff              228        25     20    21     25      24    23     26      25    15     25
                 Un                    224       21      20    23     22      25    17     25      25    19     27
                 Exp                    210      16     17     23     26      26    20      11     14    23     34
                 Kennet                 164      16      6     14     23      14    19     21      17    12     23
                 Bolcer                 148      13     19      8     18      17    16     16      13    10     18
                 Total                $8967     897    881    898    945    928    903    893    870    847    905
                 Surplus              SlOOClO   1000   1000   1000   1000   1000   1000   1000   1000   1000   1000


                             Table 4.2: Dollar Payoffs in March 1990 Double Auction Tournament


       While we are very confident of our ability to distinguish the best and worst programs, we are much less confident
about the relative rankings of the middle group of programs. One can see from Table 4.2 that after the large gaps
separating the fourth and fifth place entries (Anon-2 and Ledyard-Olson), the differences in payoffs of the next group
of programs are within I standard deviation of each other. The next significant difference in payoffs is a $10 gap
separating the gth place entry of Anon-I from the 10 th place entry of Burchard. Even after 3360 periods, it's clear
that we would need many more observations to be confident of the relative rankings of programs between 5 th and gth
place. In general it's impossible to make any reliable per.formance distinctions if we can only observe traders over a
small number of periods. The average dollar earnings of 9.4 cents per period of play is dominated by the per period
standard deviation in profits of 10.0 cents. Most of the latter variation is attributable to the 9.2 cent standard deviation
in surplus arising from traders' random token endowments. Thus, a computerized trading environment is virtually a
necessity if one wants to reliably discriminate good traders from bad. It appears that it would be infeasible to make
                                                                                                                                               17

     the same sorts of distinctions in markets with human traders given that it takes hundreds or even thousands of periods
     of play before one can be sure that differences in relative perfonnance are statistically significant.

             Total tournament payouts at the bottom of Table 4.2 provide a convenient a measure of trading efficiency, since
     conversion ratios from token profits to dollar payoffs were based on realized surplus rather than on realized profits.
     Thus, the total dollar payouts of $8,967 correspond to an 89.7% efficiency ratio." Perhaps not surprisingly, efficiency
     was highest in the environment EQL where all traders in a given DA game have symmetric token endowments (shifted
     by a common random component). However, the learning problem in this environment is not trivial since traders were
     not given any prior infonnation on the distribntion of token values (i.e. gametype was set equal to 0), and tllerefore
     had no way of knowing that everyone else was assigned equal tokens.

              It is probably also not a surprise that tlle least efficient environment was SML where there were only two
     buyers and two sellers. Human experiments reveal that the competitive properties of tlle DA market start to break
     down when there are so few traders. The SML environment is but a step away from the most extreme situation of
     bilateral bargaining, which is know to have inefficient outcomes owing to a high frequency of disagreement. The
     increased frequency of disagreement in the SML environment shows up in the distribution of trader's profits: even
     though surplus endowments are 0 only 5% of tlle time, traders walk away with 0 profits over 20% of the time. Other
     environments with relatively low efficiencies include SHRT (where there was a time constraint on trading), and BBBS
     and BSSS (duopoly and duopsony markets, respectively).

              Overall efficiency levels appear to be somewhat lower than that observed in the later periods of experimental
     markets with human traders. We suspected that tlle low trading efficiencies of the boltom 10 programs were responsible
     for most of the aggregate inefficiencies, suggesting that running a tournament that excluded these programs would
     result in a more "realistic" and efficient market. Before doing so, we gave all entrants an opportunity to revise their
     programs in light of the resnlts of the March, 1990 tournament. A second series of scientific tournaments were
     conducted in May, 1991 with seven revised entries. 23 The scientific tournament also included several new programs
     written by the anthors, including Skeleton, Pricetaker, and Zl.



n Payouts are net of profits earned by a Skeleton "stand-in" for the programs of Dallaway~Harveyand Bolcer which only played the roles of buyer
  and seller, respectively. If we were to include profits earned by Skeleton, aggregate market efficiency would be slightly higher.

23    We received revised entries from Dallaway·Harvey, Ledyard-Qlson, and Perry, and 4 revised entries from the Arizona ESL group, Ma.r:, Ma.r:-R,
     ·Slide, and Terminator.
                                                                                                                                                 18

     4.2 Results of Scieutific aud Top 17 Touruameuts


              Overall player rankings in the scientific tournament were quite similar to the original tournament. Aggregate
     efficiency increased slightly from 90% to 92%, ranging from a low of 88% in SHRT to 95% in EQL. Once again tl,e
     programs of Kaplan and Ringuette are the clear winners, with Kaplan's program trading at an overall efficiency level
     of 121 %, significantly higher than Ringuette's efficiency of 116%. Staecker's program, trading at an efficiency level of
     109%, comes in third place just as in the originallOumament. 'TWo independent copies of Skeleton placed 5 ti> and 8 th
     place, which is somewhat surprising given that Skeleton was provided to all participants in advance of the lOumament
     and thus should have represented a fairly easy target to beat. " On the lower end ofthe scale the programs Gamer, Exp,
     and Lin-which were among the poorest perfonners in the original tournament-remained the poorest perfonners in
     the scientific tournament, trading at an average efficiency level of under 70%. Zl also perfonned quite poorly n'ading
     at an efficiency level of 75%, confirming our discussion in section 2. The Neural-Network trader of Dallaway and
     Harvey perfonned somewhat better than Zl, trading exclusively in the role of buyer at an efficiency level of 85%.
     Pricetaker turned out to be the median trader at rank 17 with an average efficiency level of 95%. This is somewhat
     below the 100% efficiency ranking we would have expected for our implementation of a naive pricetaking strategy.

              In order to see whether the leading position of Kaplan and Ringuette is a result of general superiority or merely
     a relative superiority in their ability to exploit the lowest-ranked traders, we ran a third tournament consisting of the
     top 17 players from the scientific tournament. The results of the "Top 17" tournament are summarized in table 4.3.
     We see that once again, Kaplan and Ringuette remain the leaders even after elimination of the lowest-ranked traders.
     Ringuette does slightly better than Kaplan in tenus of overall earnings, altllOugh the difference is not statistically
     significant. 35 Kaplan's program comes in first place in 5 of the 10 environments whereas Ringuette's program is first in
     4 environments, and the two programs are tied for first place in environment SML. The fact that Kaplan and Ringuette
     were able to maintain their high efficiency ratios in this tighter, more competitive market suggests that they are in fact
     generally superior to all of the other programs.


24 Two copies of Skeleton were included in the scientific towuarneDt as a further .check on the statistical reliability of our rankings. The relative
   perfonnance of the two copies is rather close in all environments except TOK, where the two copies traded at efficiency levels of 41 % and 84%,
     respectively.


2S   Note that overall earnings in the scientific tournament were computed by summing token profits as'opposed to dollar earnings in the ~larch 1990
     tournament. This different implicit weighting scheme may account for the change in overall rankings of Kaplan and Ringuette.
                                                                                                                          19

  Trading program        Overall    BASE BBBS         BSSS     LAD      EQL     PER      RAN     SHRT     SML      TOK
  Ringuette                117       121      103      116      120     113      119     120       91      126      130
  Kaplan                   114       110      109      122      103     120      129     III      118      126      116
  Anon-1                   108       109      110      110      111     108      103     106      113      117      109
  Anderson                 105       100      104      102      115     106      104     103      102      107      101
  Staecker                 101       111      103      107       99      103     108       96       97     117      126
  Burchard                 101        94       92       92       91     107       84      112       95      81       84
  Perry                      98      103      104      100       97     106      106       95       87      91       97
  Anon-2                     97       99      102       98      108       95      93       93      88      107      124
  Lee                        96       90        88       81      96      105      90      101       88      90       88
  Ledyard/Olson              96       90       90       89       98     104       94       97       90      96 .    103
  Golden Buffalo             94       90       94       88      101       91      91       97       81      80      118
  Breton                     92      102       94       91       94       92      98       91       81      94      105
  Leinweber                  90       86       83       88       87       89      87       98       85       67      33
  Skeleton                   89       91        89      78       89      100      84       93       93      62       39
  ~acobson                   89       97       91       92       96       80      87       87       88       94     104
  Silver Buffalo             82       87       84       74       87       91      81       79       80      71      102
  Pricetaker                 71        81       81       95      77       68      87       57       87       98      96
  Market                     97        98       95       96      98       99      97       96       92       96      98

                              Table 4.3: Trading Efficiencies in the "Top 17" Tournament


        The only program that improved significantly in the Top 17 tournament was Anderson, which moved from
12 th place to 4 th place. The trading efficiencies of the remaining programs generally significantly declined, especially
Staecker, Lee, Skeleton, Breton, and Pricetaker. However despite these declines, average market efficiency increased
to 97%. The latter efficiency levels are as good as, if not superior to, efficiency levels observed in comparable human
experiments. Indeed we found that when we participated as human traders in the Top 17 market, it was difficult to
consistently trade at higher than 100% efficiency, whereas we found it relatively easy to consistently trade at higher
than 100% efficiency in markets that included the lowest ranked trading programs. This suggests that the Top 17
market may serve as a good working model of a "competitive market" such as observed in experimental markets with
human traders.


4.3 Aggregate Behavior of Computerized Traders: Some "Stylized Facts"


        A more detailed analysis of tournament results reveals that the top-ranked trading programs do in fact yield
a fairly realistic working model of a a DA market in the sense that their collective behavior is consistent with the
following stylizedfacts of human DA markets: I) convergence to CE, 2) high ex post efficiency levels, 3) reductions in
transaction price volatility and efficiency losses in successive trading periods reflective of apparent "learning" effects,
                                                                                                                                                     20

 4) existence of extra-marginal as weIl as intra-marginal efficiency losses, 5) low rank correlations between the realized
  order of transactions and the "efficient" order, and 6) negatively autocorrelated transaction price changes. Even in
  markets that include the less efficient lower-ranked traders, transaction price trajectories appear to be very similar to
  those observed in human markets. Indeed, we typically find that transaction prices and quantities converge close to
  the CE in the very first trading period.

           Figure 4.1 shows a typical outcome, game BASE012 of the scientific tournament. The figure plots the induced
  supply and demand curves and the transaction price trajectories in each of the three trading periods. All three trajectories
  converged to the CE, generating nearly 100% efficient outcomes. In this case the market traded at 100% efficiency
  in the first trading period, compared to 98% in the second and third periods. Despite the high ex post efficiency, the
  rank correlation coefficient between the order of the buyer's and seller's trades and the "efficient order" is very low,
  corresponding to what we observe in human experiments. For example the rank correlation for buyers and seIlers in
  period I is 60% and 48%, respectively, falling to just 10% in period 3. The infonnation in the right border of figure
  4.1· shows the times and traders involved in each transaction made in period 3. For example the 1 ,t token was traded
  in BS step 3 when buyer B3 accepted the offer of seller S4 (at a price of 429), and the 8 th token was traded in BS
  step 51 when buyer B2 accepted the offer of seller SI (at a price of 436). If trades we made in the efficient order as
  predicted by Wilson's WGDA theory described in section 2, then the first token should have been traded by B2 and
  S4 and the 8 th token should have been traded by B2 and S2. The automata traders frequently trade extra-marginal
  tokens, something that is commonly observed in human experiments but is also ruled out by game theoretic models
  such as Wilson's WGDA. For example in figure 4:1 we see that in period 3 buyer B4 succeeded in buying 3 tokens,
  "bumping" buyer B 1 who only succeeded in buying I token (in an efficient allocation, each buyer and seller trade their
  two most valuable tokens). As a result, tlle traders failed to exploit 27 units of potential surplus in period 3."

           For comparison, figure 4.2 presents typical price trajectories in a market with 100% ZI traders. The nature of
  the ZI strategy implies that transaction price sequences in successive periods are lID, so these traders cannot exhibit
  tlle type of learning behavior that is characteristic of human DA markets. It is evident that overaIl transaction price
  volatility is significantly higher for ZI traders in all periods. The zig-zag pattern of transaction price trajectories implies
  serial correlation coefficients in the neighborhood of -50% predicted by Cason and Friedman (chapter 6). Finally,
  notice that ZI traders are very impatient: they complete all their transactions in the first third of the trading period.


26 The 4-way decomposition of lost surplus, EM, IM, BS, and 55 on the right hand border of figure 4.1 is explained in secti9D 4.4 and the appendix.
  The left border of figure 4.1 presents other statistics on the trading process, broken out by period. These include the correlation coefficient of
  transaction price changes (C), ex post efficiency (E), time of last transaction (n, Speannan rank correlations of the order of the transactions with the
  efficient order for buyers (B) and sellers (5), and the maximum and average absolute percentage deviation of transaction prices from the midpoint
  equilibrium price (A), (M).
                                                                                                                                                      21


                                                                   Transaction Summary boseD 12
                                                                   81 brelon        82 onon2      BJ koplon      84 burchord
                                                                   51 smith         52 pricelok   S3 fullerlo    54 kindeed
                             Pl-         -lE                                                                                            Period
                             P2--- w                                                                                                         3
                             P3--                                                                                                        3 B3<54
                             C1 -28
                             C2 -16
                                              ~
                                              w
                                                    82+   3~+
                                                                   ". a,.                                                                5 84<54
                                                                                                                                         6 84<52
                             C3 -.35                                                                                                     7 84<52
                             El lCO           g                                                                                         11 33<53
                             £2 98            Ul                                                                                        17 82<53
                             £3  95
                             T1 46
                             T2 45
                                              ;j
                                              Ul
                                                                                                                        " " " "         38 81<51
                                                                                                                                        51 82<51



                                                                                                                                        "" "00
                             T3 51
                             61 57            0
                             82
                             83
                                     23
                                     12
                                              ~
                                                          , / "-
                                                                                                                                         "'" 0
                             Sl      48       0
                             S2      74       ':;         '(          "- 33+ 84+ 81+ 82
                             S~
                             Al
                                     10
                                      4       0
                                                              ,,         "-           ~ 62              64+ 83
                             A2
                             A3      3
                                      4"      N
                                              •                               ,
                                                                               "                                  " " "
                             1.11
                             M2
                                     12
                                     10
                                              0
                                              <0
                                                                                                                                  " "
                             1.13     5       <'1                                       5H 52+

                             S...rplus        ~ b:;:;:'~'~'~'~3~'2'~'~'='~3~'=.,~,~.:,:,,-"-=-~~_~~_~~_~~-.J
                             1372             <'1 0 1                35678910111213141516

                                                                                   q'e:[ 8, 81 p'e:[421,443J

•
                                              Figure 4.1: Price Trajectories in DA Game BASED 12



                                                                    Transoction Summary base012
                                                                    91Zi             822;         83z;           8'2i
                              PI -        -   ~ r~-,--"~'~'~'~-,.-"~'~'~'~_7,,,3~'~'_~--i-'~'~'~'-~~-~, Period
                              P2--- m                                                                                                        3
                              P3--                                                                                                       281>51
                             C1 -58                                                                                                      J BJ>52
                             C2 -48           0                                                                                          4 Bt<51
                             CJ -44           0                                                                                          a B4>SJ
                             £1 99            m                                                                                          9 82<53
                             E2 97                                                                                      51   52         12 83>52
                             EJ 95                                                                                                      16 82>51
                              Tt     28       0                                                                                         1784(52
                              T2     21       w                                                                                         21 83)54
                              T.3    28       It:                                                                                       28 84)54
                              81     27
                              62     -7
                                                                                                                                        as   10
                                                                                                                                        5S   14
                              ~~ ~~ ~                     /
                                                                                                                                        "        0
                              S2     53       <0                                                                                        "         0
                              S~     ~4                                                                                 84   81
                              At      5
                              A2      4       0

                              ~~ ~ ie ,,.
                              M2      a
                              "'    9
                              Surplus
                               98'
                                               ~ LO-'~~---'3:--'--5~-6~~7~-E:--9~-'~O-1~'---'1~2-,L3-,L,---"L5---.J16
                                                                                   cOd1 0,' OJ :>"([566,869)



                                                      Figure 4.2: Price Trajectories for Zl Traders


           The behavior displayed in figures 4.1 appears qualitatively similar to outcomes of human experiments. To
    demonstrate that these examples are not atypical, table 4.4 presents an array of trading statistics averaged over all
    tournament environments. In order to highlight learning effects, we break out the statistics by trading period. To help
    put these statistics in perspective, we also present results for a tournament with 100% ZI traders. We can see from table
    4.4 that the Top- 17 traders show significant interperiod learning effects: n"ading efficiency increases, the fraction of
                                                                                                                                           22

  price trajectories hitting the CE target increases, and price variability decreases (whether measured by the coefficient
  of variation or by the percentage deviation from the midpoint equilibrium price). The only statistics that show no
  systematic improvement in successive periods are the rank correlation coefficients of buyers' and sellers' transaction
  sequences vis a vis the efficient trading order and the serial correlation coefficient for transaction price changes. Both
  of these statistics are significantly different from the predictions of the WGDA theory (100% and 0% respectively), but
  are roughly consistent with what we observe in human experiments (30-40%, and -25%, respectively). " Efficiency
  levels are also roughly comparable, although they actually appear to be slightly higher than what we observe in human
  DA markets.

           Learning effects are much less pronounced when we include the lowest ranked trading programs, and of course
  are completely absent in markets with 100% ZI traders. Notice that while ZI traders attain the highest efficiency levels,
  price volatility (measured by any ofthe statistics in the second panel of table 4.4) is significantly higherthan tile Top-17
  traders. ZI traders are noticeably less patient, exchanging only 6% of their tokens in the second half of the trading
  period compared to over 33% for the Top-17. The statistics on the "hit rates" show that despite the high efficiency ofZI
  markets, less than 20% of all price trajectories actually converge to equilibrium, compared to nearly 27% in the third
  period in comparable markets with Top-17 traders. If we widen the target slightly and count any price trajectory that
  is within 5% of the equilibrium price interval, then the hit rate increases to over 60% for the Top-17 traders compared
  to just over 50% for the ZI traders. Hit rates for all traders in the scientific tournament are slightly lower than the ZI
  traders. The other major difference between ZI and the Top-17 traders is that the rank order correlations of the trading
  sequences are significantly higher, and the serial correlation coefficient of transaction price changes are significantly
  more negative.

           We are presently collecting detailed data sets that will allow us to go beyond the simple stylized facts outlined
  above and conduct more precise statistical comparisons of the behavior of human and computer traders. Our conjecture
  is that humans will display much more dramatic interperiodlearning effects than the Top-17 programs. It is also probable
  that we will find significant differences in the stochastic properties of price trajectories in later periods of ti,e game, as
  well as differences in the timing of of bids, asks, and transactions.



:n See Friedman and Cason, chapter 8. They suggest that serial correlation coefficients may"be ctoser to 0 in experiments with more expeIienced
  subjects, but the available data are inconclusive.
                                                                                                                        23

Statistic                          Top 17 Traders                   All Traders                     ZITraders
(standard deviation)                2327 Games                     4274 Games                      2295 Games
                            PI          P2          P3      PI             P2      P3       PI         P2        P3
BRANK                      47.8        4604      46.0      48.5           46.9    465      57.6       5704      56.6
                            (.9)        (.9)        (.9)    (.6)           (.6)    (.6)     (.9)       (.9)      (.9)
SRANK                      48.0        475       47.2      48.9           48.8    485      53.1       52.2      52.5
                            (.9)        (.9)        (.9)    (.6)           (.6)    (.6)     (.9)       (.9)      (.9)
CORRCHG                    -26.9       -24.0    -23.9      -29.9          -27.9   -27.2    -48.1      -46.6     -4704
                           (1.1)       (1.1)    (1.1)       (.8)           (.8)    (.8)     (.9)      (1.0)      (.9)
COEFVAR                     8.1         65          6.2     10.7           8.7    8.6      12.7       12.7      12.7
                            (.I )       (.2)        (.2)    (.2)           (.1)    (.1)     (.2)       (.2)      (.2)
DEV,MAX                   . 19.1        15.4     14.6      23.4           19.8    1904     27.1       27.0      27.2
                            (.4)        (.3)        (.3)    (.3)           (.3)    (.3)     (.5)       (.5)      (5)
DEV, AVERAGE                042         .15         .07     -.71          -1.24   -1.20    3.23       3046      3.17
                           (.26)       (.22)    (.21)      (.20)          (.18)   (.17)    (.22)      (.22)     (.22)
DEV,LAST                    .21         .23     0.02       -.03           -.68    -59       .73       1.15      .60
                           (.20)       (.19)    (.18)      (.19)          (.18)   (.20)    (.24)      (.24)     (.24)
ABS-DEV, AVERAGE            9.9         8.0         7.7    11.4           9.9     9.7      11.9       12.0      11.9
                            (.2)        (.2)     (.2)       (.2)          (.1)     (.1)     (.2)       (.2)      (.2)
ABS-DEV, LAST               5.0         4.6         404     6.6            65     6.5       6.7       6.8       6.9
                            (.2)        (.2)     (.2)       (.2)           (.2)    (.2)     (.2)       (.2)      (.2)
HIT RATE                   235         26.3     27.2       185            18.7    18.9     19.0       18.0      19.7
                            (.9)        (.9)        (.9)    (.6)           (.6)    (.6)     (.8)       (.8)      (.8)
HIT RATE 2                 48.8        52.3     53.2       38.6           39.2    3904     36.9       36.6      37.6
                           (1.0)       (1.0)    (1.0)       (.7)           (.7)    (.7)    (1.0)      (1.0)     (1.0)
HIT RATE 5                 57.9        6204     62.6       48.2           4904    48.6     52.3       51.4      51.2
                           (1.0)       (1.0)    (1.0)       (.8)           (.8)    (.8)    (1.0)      (1.0)     (1.0)
HIT RATE 10                82.6        86.2     86.8       no             76.7    76.8     8204       81.1      81.2
                            (.8)        (.7)     (.7)       (.6)           (.6)    (.6)     (.8)       (.8)      (.8)
PCT2ND                     40.2"       34.3     33.4       27.6           26.1    25.7 .   5.7        5.7       5.9
                            (.5)        (A)      (A)        (.3)           (.3)    (.3)     (.2)       (.2)     (.2)
EFF,AV                     94.8        96.7     96.9       90.6           91.4    9U       97.0       97.0      96.9
                            (.2)        (.1)     (.1)       (.5)           (.3)   (.3)      (.1)       (.1)      (.I)
EFF, TOTAL                 95.6        96.8     97.0       92.3           92.1    91.8     97.9       97.8      97.9
             Legend:
             BRANK        Rank correlation of buyers' transactions with efficient order
             SRANK        Rank correlation of sellers' transactions with efficient order
             CORRCHG      Correlation coefficient of transaction price changes
             COEFYAR      Coefficient of variation of trllJ1sacrlon prices
             DEV,MAX      Maximum % deviation from midpoint equilibrium price
             DEv'AV       Average % deviation from midpoint equilibrium price
             DEV,LAST     % deviation of last lransaction price from midpoint eq. price
             ABS·DEV.AV   Average absolute % deviation from midpoint equilibrium price
             ASS-DEV,LAST Absolute % deviation of last transaction price frOm midpoint eq. price
             HITRATE      % price trajectories whereq/ E [f/,il] and PI E [p,m
             HIT RATE 2   % price trajectories wheref// E        [2.ijJ
                                                                   and PI E []lSI!' L02j:i]
             HIT RATE 5   % price trajectories wheref/l E [2.,qJ and PI E [.95l!' L05ji]
             HIT RATE 10  % price trajectories wheref/l E [q - I,if + I] and PI E [.91', LIji]
             PCI2ND       % of trades occuring in 2nd halfof trading period              -
             EFP.AV       Average of Profits I Surplus for individual games
             EFF,TOTAL    Toeal Profits I Total Surplus

             Where:            1'1 is last transaction price.
                               ~J-j'il is equilibrium price interval.
                               G,g] is equilibrium quantity interval.


              Table 4.4: Summary Statistics for Successive Trading Periods
                                                                                                                        24

4.4 Analysis of DA Efficiency Losses


       One of the stylized facts of human DA markets is that a major fraction of efficiency losses are due to trades of
extra-marginal tokens. In order to quantify the magnitude of these losses, it's useful to distinguish between four types
of inefficiencies that can occur in DA markets:

   1M: value oflost surplus ofnon-traded intra-marginal tokens (i.e. those that lie to the left ofthe equilibrium quantity,
       q*) when the actual number of trades q is less than q* (0 otherwise),

  EM: valu~ of lost surplus due to trade of extra-marginal tokens (i.e. those that lie to the right of q * on the supply
      and demand curves) when the actual number of trades q is greater than q * (0 otherwise),

   BS: value of lost surplus due to trades of extra-marginal buyers' tokens that displaced potential trades of an equal
       number of buyers' intra-marginal tokens,

   SS: value of lost surplus due to trades of extra-marginal seller's tokens that displaced potential trades of an equal
       number of seller's intra-marginal tokens.

       Table 4.5 presents an "inefficiency audit" that summaIizes this 4-way decomposition of efficiency losses. The
last column of each section of table presents the ratio of total profits to total surplus in each period of play, and the
remaining columns present a percentage breakdown of lost surplus due to each of the 4 sources, EM, 1M, SS, and BS.
In general the audit reveals that total extra-marginal efficiency losses-the sum of EM, SS, and BS-constituted a
substantial fraction of total efficiency losses in all enviromnents except TOK. As noted above, this finding is consistent
with the results of human experiments that show tllat efficiency losses are frequently a result of trading too many
tokens rather than too few tokens. Extra-marginal efficiency losses were identically zero only in the EQL and TOK
environments. In EQL this result is to be expected given the nature of the token distribution which resulted supply
and demand curves with large steps, each four units wide, a unique equilibrium price, and a four unit range of market
clearing quantities. In the single token TOK environment, if an EM efficiency loss occurs it is more likely tllat some
trader has taken a loss on a transaction. We can see that in the scientific tournament EM losses in the TOK environment
are non-zero, refiecting the fact tllat some traders (principally the programs Free and Kindred) were trading at a loss.
Once these lower ranked programs were removed in the Top 17 tournament, EM efficiency losses were virtually
eliminated.

        Overall, Table 4.5 shows that the largest single source of inefficiency is 1M, indicating that generally too few
rather than too many tokens were traded. This effect is most noticeable in environments TOK and SHRT. Such a result
is to be expected for the SHRT environment due to the small number of trading steps. However the large value of 1M
in the TOK environment is surprising, given that one would expect it would be much easier to trade a single token
                                                                                                                                                   25

       instead of four." Intra-marginal efficiency losses were also large in the dnopsony and dnopoly environments BSSS
       and BBBS. In BBBS this may possibly reflect sellers' attempts at "collusion" in order to restrict output in an attempt
       to share joint monopoly profits. Note however that the other large source of efficiency losses is due to excessive
       competition on the long side of the market. Thus, in environment BSSS where there are 3 sellers for each buyer, the
       large value of the SS efficiency losses indicate that the six sellers became engaged in "price wars" as they competed
       to sell their tokens to the two buyers.

               Table 4.5 show that the level of intra-marginal efficiency losses are typically significantly lower in the Top 17
       tournament, reflecting the fact that the majority of the lower-ranked trading programs did poorly as a consequence of
       failing to trade all of their potentially profitable tokens: On the other hand, the relatively higher levels ofextra-marginal
       efficiency losses in the Top 17 tournament provide another indication that this is indeed a relatively more competitive
       and aggressive market.


       4.5 Results of the "Evolutionary Tournament"


                A limitation of the previous tournaments is that trading programs were not allowed to play against themselves.
       In order to provide a simple model of of imitation and growth processes we decided to conduct an "evolutionary
       tournament" based on ideas from evolutionary biology (Axelrod 1984, Maynard Smith, 1992)." The idea is that in
       real world markets the best traders will attempt to "clone" their strategies in order to gather a larger market share.
       These processes will tend to lead to expansion in the number of traders using effective trading rules and declines in
       the number using poor trading strategies. However the changing market composition may also present opportunities: •
       some trading rules (such as Anderson's) may actually perform better in a tighter, more competitive market.

                In an evolutionary tournament each trading program is assigned a measure of"fimess", and an initial population
       of programs evolves over time according to a specified set of "replicator dynamics". Specifically, let the fitness level
       of program i in game t be given by its capital stock Ki(t). A trader's fitness evolves over time according to the law
       of motion:
                                                          K;(t) = Ki(t - 1) + ITi(t) - Sift)                                                     (4.1)

       where ITi(t) is trader i's profit in game t, and Si(t) is the surplus (i.e. token value) assigned to trader i in game t.
       Thus, our measure of fitness corresponds to trading efficiency: fitness increases when trading efficiency exceeds 100%


::lS   This result may indicate possible programming problems if the majority of entrants developed their programs on the assumption that traders would
       nonnally be endowed with fOUf tokens. Although tournament rules explicitly noted the possibility of single token environments, all pre-tournament
       games run on SFTE involved fOUf token environments. Entrants may have assumed that single token environments would constitute a negligible
       share of tournament profits and focused their attention on the four token case.


29 Actually,    from a strict biological perspective it would be more accurate to call it an "ecological tournament" since the set of species (trading
       programs) is fixed and only their relative proportions are allowed to change over time.
                                                                                                                        26

            Case                        Scientific Tournament                         Top 17 Tournament
   Enviroment      Period     EM        1M       SS        BS        Total   EM      1M       SS        BS      Total
   BASE               I       10.1     35.8      17.3     36.8       93.7    35.8    33.7     13.2     17.3     97.0
                      2        9.6     43.0      12.4     34.9       93.4    41.0   31.0      12.2     15.9     97.8
                      3       10.2     41.4      13.9     34.5       93.4    49.0    19.4     14.4     17.2     98.2
   BBBS               I        4.2     45.2       2.1     48.5       91.2    10.0    53.1      4.8     32.1     93.7
                      2        3.2     48.7       2.1     45.9       90.3    13.7    43.7      4.1     38.5     95.9
                      3        32      47.4       2.0     47.4       90.6    13.8    34.2      4.9     47.1     95.9
   BSSS               1        0.8     55.0      42.0      2.2       91.3     6.8    36.5     50.7      6.0     94.2
                      2        0.7     51.0      46.1      2.2       92.2     9.6    13.4     70.4      6.6     96.0
                      3        0.3     57.0      41.3          1.5   91.6    11.1    16.0     67.5      5.4     96.0
   EQL                1        0.0     82.9       5.7     11.5       94.8     0.0    53.1     26.0     20.8     98.3
                      2        0.0      89.7      3.2          7.1   94.9     0.0    50.0     24.3     25.7     98.8
                      3        0.0     89.3       4.2          6.5   95.1     0.0    50.8     19.7     29.5     98.9
   LAD                1        8.8     56.6      13.8     20.8       94.0    21.0    26.2     28.6     24.2     97.8
                      2        6.4     53.4      18.6     21.6       93.9    23.4    17.2     26.2     33.2     98.3
                      3        6.2     53.9      16.8     23.1       93.7    29.5    14.3     25.5     30.7     98.4
   RAN                1       21.0      30.8     16.9     31.3       91.8    44.2    13.3     20.5     22.0     95.6
                      2       14.6      36.7     11.4     37.3       91.5    49.9    13.2     14.9     22.1     96.4
                      3       11.6     38.5      10.6     39.3       90.8    52.6    15.9     12.4     19.1     96.6
   SML                1        7.8      72.7      9.1      10.4      91.1     8.3    69.2     16.9     5.51      93.0
                      2        7.9      72.5      7.6      11.9      91.3    15.9    50.0     24.6      9.5     96.3
                      3        6.8      74.0      6.7      12.4      90.8    16.3    43.7     23.5      16.5     97.1
   TOK                1       11.7      85.5      1.4          1.3   95.0     0.0    95.7      2.3       2.0     97.5
                      2        2.9     95.6       0.5          1.0   93.2     0.0    94.2      5.8      0.0      99.1
                      3        2.3      96.3      0.5          0.9   94.0     0.0    95.9      2.7       1.4     98.2
   SHRT               1        3.2      62.7     11.4     22.6       88.3     4.5    70.5     15.5       9.5     89.3
                      2        3.0      62.6     10.6      23.8      88.1     7.5    68.0     12.8      11.7     92.9
                      3         2.5     64.5     10.3     22.8       87.6     6.4    67.1     15.3      11.2     93.4

                                        Table 4.5: Analysis of Efficiency Losses


and declines otherwise. A real world interpretation is that traders are buying and selling shares of stock. In game t the
trader purchases shares of stock at an initial cost of Si(t), closing out his account at the end of the day by selling off
his shares for IIi( t). The competitive hypothesis that price and quantity converge to CE can be re-interpreted as the
"efficient markets hypothesis" that the expected value of end-of-day holdings II itt) equals the initial purchase price
Sit t). However if markets are not completely efficient, then superior traders should be able to make positive expected
profits) tending to increase their capital stocks over time.
                                                                                                                                                  27

             Our "replicator dynamic" posits that the fraction Pj(t) of traders using strategy j in game t is proportional to
     the relative capital share of the type j traders:

                                                                                   I
                                                            Pj(t) = Kj(t)      /'L Ki(t)
                                                                                  i=l
                                                                                                                                               (4.2)


     These dynamics reflect what one might call the "Dean Witter Philosophy": namely, if Dean Witter manages x% of the
     stock of investment capital, then on any given day we would expect that approximately x% of the traders in the market
     will be employed by Dean Witter.

             We begin the evolutionary tournament by endowing all traders with equal initial capital shares, Ki(O) = K,
     i = 1, ... , I. In a DA market with L buyers and M sellers, we begin the evolution by taking L lID draws (with
     replacement) from the population of buyers and M IID draws from the population of sellers to form the market using
     the multinomial distribution (4.2). Given a randomly selected set of traders we playa DA game. from the BASE
     environment with a randomly selected set of tokens. After trading is complete the capital stocks of the L buyers and
     M sellers are updated according to (4.1), new selection probabilities are computed according to (4.2), and a new set
     of players is drawn for game t = 1. It is also easy to construct a market where a constant fraction of noise-traders,
     say, p%, enters the market in each game t. For each of the L buyers and M sellers in the DA market, we draw lID
     Bernoulli random variables with parameter p. If the outcome of the m 'h Bernoulli random variable B m is 0, then the
     m'h seller is selected from the pool of I "permanent" traders according to (4.2), otherwise if B m = 1 then the m'"
     seller is selected at random from a fixed set of noise-trader programs (and similarly for buyers)."

             We have not proved any results about the limiting behavior of the evolutionary tournament such as whether
     or not the limiting set of traders form a stable set along the lines of Maynard Smith's notion of "evolutionary stable
     strategies" (ESS). Indeed, it is not even clear that one can define the precise conditions under which the evolution of
     capital stocks constitutes an ergodic stochastic process. It is easy to see that in the case of a closed market with no
     inflow of noise-traders the aggregate capital stock is indeed an ergodic stochastic process: any market with non-zero
     efficiency losses must eventually hit an absorbing state of zero capital with probability 1. However, our computer
     simulations suggest that the I -dimensional stochastic process of capital shares is non-ergodic. Indeed, our computer
     simulations indicate that the long-run outcome of competition among our fixed set of trading programs is unstable, i.e.
     the stable set is empty.


30   There are two ways to handle the profits (or losses) earned by noise-traders. One way is to update capital stocks oftbe noise-traders according
     to (4.2), treating them as a subset of the set of permanent traders. This effectively provides a lower bound of piN on any trader's panicipation
     probability, where N is the number of noise-traders. The other way is not to update the capital stocks for the programs which were selected
     as noise-traders. This latter method may still indirectly increase the capital stocks of the pennanent traders to the extent that they are able to
     systematically extract surplus from the noise-traders.
                                                                                                                          28

       Figures 4.3 and 4.4 clearly illustrate this result in the case of an evolutionary tournament conducted under
the BASE environment. We evolved capital stocks for buyers and sellers separately to test whether there are any
asymmetries in the traders' performance. All 66 traders (33 buyers and 33 sellers) were equally endowed with an
initial capital stock of 80,000. We stopped the tournament after 28,000 games when the buyers' capital stock had
dwindled to less than 8% of its original value, as can be seen from the line labelled "market" in figure 4.3. The striking
feature about both figures is that after aboutS,OOO games Kaplan's program emerges as the clear leader, dominating
the both the buyers' and sellers' market after 20,000 games. The programs of Ringuette and Staecker have the second
and third largest capital shares, but notice that after 20,000 games their influence begins to diminish, losing out to the
dominant competition of the Kaplan traders. 111is effect is especially pronounced among the buyers, and after 22,000
games the capital stocks of Ringuette and Staecker have been reduced to less than their initial allocations, allowing
Kaplan to achieve near total domination of tile market. However this is precisely when Kaplan's program began to
head into a precipitous decline, losing more than half of its capital stock in the succeeding 6,000 games.

       The reason for Kaplan's fall is clear: the success of a "wait in tile background" strategy depends on being in a
market populated with active bidders. If all traders attempt to try to wait in the background, little information will be
generated as each trader waits for tile others to make tile first move. By tile end of the period there will be a trading
panic as all traders attempt to unload tileir tokens. Thus, there is a much higher likelibood tilat tile period will expire
with unexploited surplus left on the table. This leads to a sharp fall in aggregate efficiency, precipitating the market
"crash" that is evident in figure 4.4.

       It follows tilat it cannot be collectively stable for all traders to adopt a "wait in tile background" strategy: doing
so creates a seriolls information externality that prevents the market from converging to CEo However in Kaplan's case
the negative impact of the infonnation externality is actually not the primary reason for his precipitous decline. The
primary reason is tilat his program switches into "truthtelling mode" once it succeeds in monopolizing tile market.
Specifically, if a long time has elapsed since tile last trade, or if time remaining in the trading period is running out,
Kaplan's program places a bid equal to tile minimum of tile current ask and T - 1 where T is the value of the next
untraded token. In practice, tile current ask is likely to exceed T - 1 after a long period of inactivity (otherwise tile
program would have already jumped in), implying tilat Kaplan's program effectively becomes a trutilteller by bidding
T - 1. Long periods of inactivity-a sign of impasse between buyers and sellers-are quite likely occur when at
least one side of tile market is dominated by background traders like Kaplan or Ringuette. It follows tilat once these
programs succeed in monopolizing tile market Kaplan's program necessarily switches into truthtelling mode.

        Although trutiltelling is a very bad strategy in a market populated by even slightly smarrer strategies (as is
clearly evident from the fact tilat truthteller provides the lower envelope for tile capital trajectories in figures 4.3 and
4.4), truthtelling can be collectively stable if all traders adopt it since a market witil 100% truthtellers is necessarily
100% efficient. Indeed, that is what we found when we ran a tournament with 100% Kaplan traders in the BASE
                                                                                                                 29

GAUSS       Tue J"I 1617:31:261991


                                         Evolution of Sellers' Capitol

        <D
        <D                                                        kaplan
        0


    .   <D


        en
 -'"
 0
  ()
    .'"
 if)

 .s
    .   N


        <D
  <l
  0     ",
 0      0


 ~
  '" "'
  >
  0
        .
        N
                                                                                           stoecker


                                                                                        anon1

  '" '"

        N
 Q'




          th        _',
        r~~~===:~;;;;~~~~;;~ci09~".t~t~
        ~
        ~
        o

        0     0 .0
                  tru


                                  0.5      1.0              15
                                                                           anderson




                                                                             2.0
                                                                                      ledyord


                                                                                                ~·5
                                                                                                         arket




                                                           Gqme

GAUSS       Tu~   J"I 16 16:$3,16 1991


                                          E\'ol ution of    ~..,~yers'   Capital
        <D
        <D

        0


    .   <D


        en

 '" .'"
  ()




    .
  0
 if)    N


 .s     <D
  Q.
  0     "'0
 0


 ~
  '"> "'
  0
        .
        N


  '" '"
 Q'

        N

                                                led}'ord
        <D                                                                 anderson
        0
                   truth                   :i
                                                                                                      ~arket
        0

        o O.D                     0.5      1.(1                              2,.0




                        Figures 4.3 and 4.4: Results of the "Evolutionary Tournament"
                                                                                                                                               30

  environment. This suggests that Kaplan's two-stage wait-in-the-background/truthtelling strategy might actually be a
  clever way to gain and maintain a monopoly position." However closer examination of figures 4.3 and 4.4 reveal the
  inherent danger of this approach. By game 22,000 Kaplan's program h~d virtually monopolized the buyers' market,
  but it still had not completely monopolized the sellers' market." Thus, Kaplan's buyers tended to get locked into a
  waiting game with each other, causing them to switch into truthtelling mode resulting in a net windfall to the sellers
  (who were still predominantly in background mode). This scenario is clearly reflected in the fact that the steady decline
  in seller's capital decelerated after game 22,000, so that by game 28,000 sellers still had nearly 60% of their initial
  capital stock. Since Kaplan's program dominated the seller's market it gained the most, multiplying its initial capital
  stock over 12 times to 984,735.

           Given the overall similarity in the programs of Kaplan and Ringuette, why does Kaplan dominate in the long
  run? Initially both Kaplan and Ringuette succeed in exploiting the other programs, as can be seen by their relatively
  equal capital shares in the first 5,000 games of the evolutionary tournament. However, once Kaplan and Ringuette start
   to co-dominate the market, Ringuette's efficiency levels fall from nearly 120% to well below 100% allowing Kaplan
  to take the lead. It is not easy to identity the precise cause of this outcome, although parts of the reasons have been
   discussed in our comparison of Kaplan and Ringuette in Rust, Palmer and Miller (1992). 11 appears that the principal
  reason for Ringuette's decline is that his program is more impatient to trade than Kaplan's, switching from the role of
   a background trader to an active bidder much sooner than Kaplan does. On the other hand, when Ringuette's program
   encounters a period of inactivity, it invokes a much more aggressive active bidding strategy than Kaplan, namely a
   slightly modified version of Skeleton. However since Skeleton consistently loses out to Kaplan when the latter is in
   "background mode", it should not be surprising that Ringuetre's program also loses given that it typically switches to
   "skeleton mode" long before Kaplan's program has switched to truthtelling mode. Specifically, Ringuette's program
   switches to skeleton mode whenever the number of elapsed steps since the last trade exceeds the smaller of 12, or 60%
   of the remaining steps in the game." In comparison Kaplan's program switches to trutillelling mode whenever the
   number of time steps since the last transaction exceeds one half of tile number of remaining steps, or whenever 5 steps
   have elapsed since the last h'ansaction and the number of sleps since his program last traded exceeds two thirds of
   the remaining steps. Thus, at the beginning of a DA game dominated by Kaplan and Ringuette, Ringuette's program


31 Itis unlikely that Kaplan designed his program with this idea in mind since the rules for awarding cash prizes in the March, 1990 tournament are
   inconsistent with the use of the kinds of evolutionary tournaments which we subsequently designed,

32 By game 28,000 the top sellers were Kaplan (64%), Staecker (10%), Anon~l     (8%), Perry (7%), Anderson (6%), and Ringuette (3%). In contrast,
   Kaplan controlled nearly 98% of the buyers' capital.

33 Ringuette apparently also intended to return a bid from skeleton whenever there were fewer than 1/8 of the total number of steps remaining in the

   game, however due to an apparent programming error, this option is never invoked.
                                                                                                                                               31

 will switch to skeleton mode after BS step 12 whereas Kaplan's program will still be playing the role of a background
  trader.

            10 biological terms, our evolutionary tournaments have suggested the following conclusions: 1) Kaplan's
  strategy appears to be able to successfully invade a population ofnon-Kaplan's (including Ringuette), 2) a collection of
  100% Kaplan strategies is not collectively stable. These conclusions suggest that the outcome of "closed" evolutionary
  tournaments (I.e. ones that exclude subsequent entry of noise-traders) may be characterized by cycles of "booms" and
  "crashes" in the populations of Kaplan's. In a boom period, Kaplan's program invades and overtakes a population
  of non-Kaplan's. However a crash begins once Kaplan's program attains a near monopoly, dying off on account of
  negative information externalities which cause it to switch into truthtelling mode. 10 the latter case Kaplan's relative
  capital share will shrink until a sufficient number of active bidders are present in the market to enable Kaplan's
  program to remain in background sufficiently frequently to counterbalance the losses incurred in truthtelling mode.
  We conducted evolutionary tournaments with noise-traders and found that only a small fraction of active bidders-5
  or 10 percent-is necessary to achieve stability in capital shares. However there is little evidence that any of the other
  programs can successfully invade a population of Kaplan's that are operating in background mode. Otherwise we
  would have observed growth in their capital shares as Kaplan's program started to monopolize the market. Except for
  a slight upturn in Anderson's capital share in figure 4.4, there is no evidence that this is happening." By remaining in
  the background, Kaplan's program is able to capitalize on the mistakes of the active bidders, lifting its efficiency well
  above 100% and ensuring its growth while pushing the active bidders' efficiency well below 100% and ensuring their
  decline. 10 the absence of an active biddiug strategy that can successfully invade (or at least coexist) with a population
  of Kaplan's, there would appear to be no mechanism to stabilize the resulting cycles of booms and crashes. However
  given the passive nature of a "wait in the background" strategy, it is difficult to see how one could exploit it. Since
  this sttategy is essentially parasitic, we might pose the key open question in biological terms: are there strategies and
  environments that are resistant to invasion by Kaplanites?


  5. Conclusions

            10 this paper we have studied the behavior of a collection of computer programs playing the roles of buyers
  and sellers in a discretized version of a dynamic double auction market. One of our objectives was to use this
  market in an attempt to understand the operation of the "invisible hand". We found that despite the decentralized
  nature of the trading process and traders' incomplete information about supply and demand, tile transaction price
  trajectories of a heterogeneous collection of computer programs typically converged to the competitive equilibrium,


34 The upturn in Anderson's share of sellers' capital appears to coincide with Kaplan's monopolization of the buyers' market. Thus, the upturn seems
  more likely to reflect Anderson's ability to capture some of windfall gains provided by Kaplan's buyers when they entered truthtelling mode than
  Anderson's ability to successfully invade a population of Kaplan's.
                                                                                                                       32

resulting in allocations that were nearly 100% efficient. Our findings complement and extend previous theoretical and
experimental insights by Easley and Ledyard, Gode and Sunder, and Wilson, taking us one step closer to resolving
Hayek's problem; namely to "show how a solution is produced by the interactions of people each of whom possesses
only partial knowledge." Specifically, the fact that convergence occurs in markets where traders use simple rules-
of-thumb suggests that it is the DA insritution, rather than the rationality of the traders per se, that is responsible
for the emergence of competitive outcomes.. The DA trading rules, particularly the "New York Rules" governing
the improvement of standing bids and offers, appear to act as a "funnel" tilat guides the uncoordinated actions of
a heterogeneous collection of decision rules towards the CEo Other institutional features, including the discrete VS.
continuous nature of trading process, do not appear to playa significant role in generating competitive outcomes. In
particular, our imposition of the "AURORA Rules" restricting which traders are eligible to accept the standing bid or
ask does not appear to impose a significant constraint on trading opportunities or prevent the market from converging
to CEo


         Our second objective was to compare the behavior of human and automata traders. Overall, we found that the
top-ranked trading programs appear to yield a "realistic" working model of a DA market in the sense that their collective
behavior is consistent with the key "stylized facts" observed in human DA experiments: I) convergence to CE, 2)
high ex post efficiency, 3) reductions in transaction price volatility and efficiency losses in successive trading periods
reflective ofapparent "learning" effects,4) existence ofextra-marginal as well as intra-marginal efficiency losses, 5) low
rank correlations between the realized order of transactions and the "efficient" order, and 6) negatively autocorrelated
transaction price changes. More detailed statistical comparisons of human and computer traders will have to await
the completion of matching human experiments to be conducted in our discretized DA market. The fact that our
collection of program traders seem to behave similarly to human n·aders may not seem surprising if programmers are
merely encoding their "market intuition" into tlleir computer programs. However, given the complexity of the DA
environment and the sophistication of human intelligence, it is not obvious that human behavior in these markets can
be captured by a few simple decision rules.

         Our final objective was to characterize the form of effective trading strategies in DA markets. We srudied a
collection of over 30 computer programs ranging in complexity from simple rules-of-thumb to sophisticated adap-
tivellearuing procedures employing some of the latest ideas from the literature on artificial intelligence and cognitive
science. In order to evaluate the programs. we conducted an extensive series of computer tournaments involving
hundreds of thousands of individual DA games, covering a wide range of trading environments and compositions of
trading partners. To our surprise, a single program emerged as the clear wimer in nearly all of the tournaments and
trading environments. The winning program, submitted by economist Todd Kaplan of the University of Mimesota,
was one of the simplest programs that we studied, and can be characterized as nOll-adaptive, non-predictive, non-
stochastic, and non-optimizing. The basic idea behind the program is to wait in the background to let others do the
                                                                                                                                                 33

     negotiating, but when bid and ask get sufficientiy close,jump in and "steal the deal". The program makes no use of
     prior information about the joint distribution oftoken values, and relies on only a few key variables such as its privately
     assigned token values, the current bid and ask, its number of remaining tokens, and the time remaining in the current
     period. The fact that one can design an effective trading program relying on only a few sufficient statistics confirms
     Hayek's observation about "the remarkable economy of knowledge that is required in order to take the right action in
     a competitive market".

             It appears that the success of Kaplan's strategy is due to the fact that in an efficient market, if the current bid
     and ask are close, then it is likely to be tile case that either I) bid and ask are close to the equilibrium price interval, or
     2) the current bid or ask are close as a result of a mistake in which one of the holders' failed to place their bid or ask
     at a sufficiently favorable price. Kaplan's program attempts to "steal the deal" by placing a bid equal to tile previous
     asking price, but only if it can make a profit at tilat price. As a result Kaplan's program tends to earn at least a normal
     profit if case I) holds, and a super-normal profit if another trader has made a mistake. Since the decision of how much
     to bid is much more difficult tilan the binary buy/sell decision, it is not surprising that mistakes in bidding are a primary
     source of poor trading perfonnance. By staying out of the bidding game, Kaplan's program is able to avoid making
     bidding mistakes on its own account while capitalizing on bidding mistakes of others.

             Another reason for the relatively poor performance of the complex, adaptive, optimiZing, and predictive
     strategies is the inherent difficulty of making accurate inferences in a noisy marketplace given only a limited number of
     observations on one's opponents. The randomness in traders' token endowments is the dominant source of uncertainty
     in any particular DA game. The additional variation in profits induced by mistakes or stochastic elements in the
     trading strategies is insignificant in comparison. As a result, one needs a very large number of observations on trading
     outcomes to be able to reliably distinguish good traders from bad. It follows that it is virtually impossible to try to
     recognize and exploit the individual idiosyncrasies of one's individual ttading partners unless one is interacting with
     the same group over a very long horizon. The low signal/noise ratio of realized trading profits combined with the
     high dimensionality of the space of possible trading histories and trading environments implies that programs based on
     generalleaming principles (such as neural networks and genetic algorithms) require many thousands of DA training
     games before they are able to trade even semi-effectively." Nearly all of tile top-ranked programs were based on a
     fixed set of intuitive rules-of-thumb tilat encoded the programmer's prior knowledge of trading process. This finding
     suggests that our hopes of using computerized agents endowed with general principles of artificial intelligence to
     evaluate alternative institutional designs may be too ambitious.


35   To quote from the entry by DaUaway and Harvey; "Given that we are doing the equivalent of evolving monkeys that can type Hamlet, we think
     the monkeys have reached the stage where they recognize that they should not eat the typewriter. If we could have a 4 billion year time extension
     before handing in the entry, we are completely confident of winning."
                                                                                                                           34

       Given the simplicity, robustness, and effectiveness of the "wait in the background" strategy, it seems likely
other traders would attempt to imitate it, leading to growth in the relative numbers of these sorts of background traders.
On the other hand less profitable traders should gradually exit the market due to competitive pressures. In order to
study the long-run equilibrium of such market we conducted an "evolutionary tournament" in which the fraction of
each type of trader was proportional to its share of the total capital stock. The capital of each trader was updated after
each DA game, increasing or decreasing by the difference between realized profits and the trader's surplus allocation
in the game. Thus, the capital stocks and relative numbers of each type of trader grew or shrank depending on whether
it traded at greater than or less than 100% efficiency. Starting from equal initial capital endowments, the background
traders succeeded in exploiting and driving out the active bidders, nearly monopolizing the market. However the
background traders create a negative "information externality" by waiting for their opponents to make the first move.
If all traders do this, little information will be generated and the market would be unable to function efficiently. In
order to avoid such a deadlock, Kaplan's program defaults to a "truthtelling" bidding strategy if a sufficiently long
time has elapsed since a trade has occurred. AltllOugh a collection of 100% truthtellers is necessarily 100% efficient,
it can be easily exploited by even slightly more sophisticated strategies.

       The long-run stability of this market depends on whether it is open or closed to new entrants. A closed market
tends to be unstable, exhibiting cycles of booms and crashes in the population of background traders. In a boom period
the background traders invade and overtake a population of active bidders. A crash begins when the background traders
achieve a near monopoly, because the negative information externalities that they create cause Kaplan's program to
switch into truthtelling mode. Only in a knife-edge case where Kaplan's traders are able to simultaneously monopolize
both sides of the market is a stable equilibrium achieved with 100% truthtelling. But typically the background traders
will succeed in monopolizing one side of the market before the other, resulting in its precipitous decline as a result of
systematic exploitation by the background traders on the other side of the market.

        However in an open market, active bidding by a steady flow of short-lived noise-traders succeeds in stabilizing
the pattern of booms and crashes in the number of Kaplan traders. Only a small fraction of noise-traders, comprising
less than 10% of the market, is necessary to keep Kaplan's traders in background mode sufficiently frequently to
counterbalance the losses they incur in truthtelling mode. Kaplan's traders make up at least 90% of the market in the
long-run since the growth of a competitive fringe causes Kaplan's traders to shift into background mode, exploiting
and eventually halting the growth of the fringe.

        Although the noise-traders facilitate long-run stability in market shares, the limiting market is still quite unstable.
In particular, transaction price volatility is unrealistically high-a consequence of the fact that the Kaplan traders are
frequently in truthtelling mode. It is unlikely that this situatlon could persist in the presence of truly adaptive traders,
since they would eventually discover best-replies that exploit the fact that Kaplan's program eventually switches inro
trllthtelIing mode. Since the trading programs submitted to our initial DA toumament were designed to do well in a
                                                                                                                                                        35

      sequence of short-run encounters with heterogeneous opponents rather than in long-run interactions with homogeneous
      opponents, it is not surprising that none were successful in exploiting this particular idiosyncrasy.

               The open question is whether there exist strategies that are capable of dominating Kaplan's "wail in the
      background" strategy over a non-trivial range of environments. If we were to run another DA tournament, it seems
\
      likely that entrants would attempt to beat Kaplan by ~eveloping more sophisticated delay and "endgame" strategies
      rather than reverting to truthtelling mode after a fixed amount of time. Thus, even though Wilson's WGDA equilibrium
      appears to be inconsistent with the behavior of humans and computer programs, we view our results as confirming his
      insight on the importance of delay as a key ingredient of an effective trading strategy. The main complicating factor
      is that traders generally don't have any prior knowledge about the strategies used by their opponents, and it may be
      very difficult to learn those strategies unless one is interacting with the same group for a very long period of time. If
      this is the case, then simple rules-of-thumb such as Kaplan's may enable one to capture the key features of an effective
      sttategy in a anonymous market consisting of short-run encounters with heterogeneous (and impatient) opponents,
      whereas more complicated adaptive/leaming procedures may do better in a market where one repeatedly trades over
      a long period of time with a fixed set of opponents. In future work we plan to investigate whether one can develop
      hybrid rules that graft adaptive/leaming procedures onto simple, effective rules-of-thumb, using the rule-of-thumb as
      a fall-back, but creating the possibility that it might be improved in light of trading experience." Our hope is to
      characterize strategies that are undominated. over a broad range of environments and consistent with long-run market
      stability.


    36 For example, if a learning rule were"grafted" onto Kaplan's strategy,  it might be smart enough to recognize that other traders were taking advantage
      of its truthtelling mode, adjusting its delay and bidding rules to insure its 100g.J.1l0 survival.
                                                                                                              36

6. References

    1] Abreu, D., and A. Rubinstein (1988) "Finite Automata Play the Repeated Prisoner's Dilemma" Econometrica
      57·4,345-352.

  [ 2] Andreoni, J., and J.H. Miller (1990) "Auctions with Adaptive Artificial Agents" Santa Fe Institute Working
      Paper 90-01-004.

  [ 3] Axelrod, R. (1984) The Evolution of Cooperation New York, NY: Basic Books.

  [ 4] Blum, M. (1967) "A Machine-Independent Theory of the Complexity of the Recursive Functions" Journal of
      the ACM 14-2, 322-336.

  [ 5] Bollerslev, T., and I. Domowitz (1991) "Some Effects of Restricting the Electronic Order Book in an Auto-
      mated Trade Execution System" Working Paper 105, Kellogg Graduate School of Management, Nortllwestern
      University.

  [ 6] Cason, T.N., and D. Friedman (1991) "An Empirical Analysis of Price Formation in Double Auction Markets"
      manuscript, University of California, Santa Cruz, forthcoming in D. Friedman, J. Geanakoplos, D. Lane,
      and J. Rust (eds.) The Double Auction Market: Theories, Institutions, and Experimental Evaluations
      Redwood City, CA: Addison-Wesley.

    7] Diaconis, P., and D. Freedman (1986) "The Inconsistency of Non-Parametric Bayesian Analysis" Annals of

      Statistics.

    8] Easley, D., and J. Ledyard (1986) "Theories of Price Fornlation and Exchange in Double Oral Auctions"
      Social Science Working Paper 611, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, forthcoming in D.
      Friedman,J. Geanakoplos, D. Lane, andJ. Rust (eds.) The Double Auction Market: Tlwories, Institutions,
       and Experimental Evaluations Redwood City, CA: Addison-Wesley.

    9] Freedman, D. (1963) "On the Inconsisrency of Bayes Estimates in Infinite-Dimensional Spaces" Annals of
       Sta.tistics.

  [10] Friedman, D. (1991) "A Simple Testable Model of Double Auction Markets" Journal of Economic Bebmior
       and Organization 47-50.

  [11] Garcia, C.B. (1980) "On the Dynamics of Prices to Equilibrium in a Double Auction Market" manuscript,

       University of Chicago Graduate School of Business.
                                                                                                                37

[12] Gode, D.K., and S. Sunder (1991) "Allocative Efficiency of Markets with Zero Intelligence (ZI) Traders: Market
    as a Partial Substitute for Individual Rationality" manuscript, Graduate School of Industrial Administration,
    Carnegie Mellon University.

[13] Hayek, F. (1945) "The Use of Knowledge in Society" American Economic Review 35·4, 519-530.

[14] Hertz, J.A., Krogh, A.S., and R.G. Palmer (1991) Introduction to the Tlleory of Neural Computatioll
    Redwood City, CA: Addison-Wesley.

[15] Holland, J. (1975) Adaptatioll in Natural alld Artificial Systems Ann Arbor, M1: University of Michigan
    Press.

[16] Kagel, J.H., and W.E. Vogt (1991) "Buyer's Bid Double Auctions: Some Preliminary Experimental Results"
     manuscript, University of Pittsburgh, forthcoming in D. Friedman, J. Geanakoplos, D. Lane, and J. Rust (eds.)
     Tlle Double Auction Market: Tlleories, Institutions, and Experimental Evaluations Redwood City, CA:
     Addison-Wesley.

'[17] Ledyard, J. (1986) "The Scope of the Hypothesis of Bayesian Equilibrium" Journal of Ecollomic Theory 39,
     59-82.

[18] Marimon, R. McGratten, E. Sargent, T. (1990)"Money as Medium ofExchange in an Economy with Artificially
     Intelligent Agents" Computer Science ill Ecollomics and Mallagemellt 5, 109-123.

[19] Maynard Smith, J. (1982) Evolutioll alld the Theory of Games Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

[20] Myerson, R. (1981) "Optimal Auction Design" Mathematics of Operatiolls Research 6, 58-73.

[21] Myerson, R., and M.A. Satterthwaite (1983) "Efficient Mechanisms for Bilateral Trade" Journal of Economic
     Theory 29, 265-281.

[22] Narendra, K.S. (1986) Adaptive and Leaming Systems: Tlleory and Applicatiolls New York, NY: Plenum
     Press.

[23] Palmer, R.G., J. Rust, and J.R. Miller (1990) "Double Anction Toumament Participant's Manual" Santa .Fe
     Institute.

[24] Robens, J., A. Postlewaite (1976) "The Incentives for Price-Taking Behavior in Large Exchange Econonties"
     Econometrica44, 115-128.
                                                                                                              38

[25] Rustichini, A., M.A. Satterthwaite, and S.R. Williams (1990) "Convergence to Price-Taking Behavior in
    a Simple Market" Discussion Paper 914, Center for Mathematical Studies in Economics and Management
    Science, Northwestern University, Evanston, lL.

[26] Satterthwaite, M.A., and S.R Williams (1989a) "Bilateral Trade with the Sealed-Bid k-Double Auction:
    Existence and Efficiency" Journal of Economic Theory 48, 107-133.

[27] Satterthwaite, M.A., and S.R. Williams (1989b) "The Rate of Convergence to Efficiency in the the Buyer's Bid
    Double Auction as the Market Becomes Large" Review of Economic Studies 56, 477-498.

[28] Selten, R, M. Mitzkewitz, and G. Uhlich (1990) "Duopoly Strategies Programmed by Experienced Players"
    manuscript, Bonn University, Germany.

[29] Smith, V.L., A. Williams, K. Bratton, and M. Vannoni (1982) "Competitive Market Institutions: Double
    Auctions versus Sealed Bid-Offer Auctions" American Economic Review 72,58-77.

[30] Wheeler, RM. Jr., and K.S. Narendra (1986) "Decentralized Learning in Finite MarkOV Chains" IEEE 'frans-
     actions on Automatic Control AC-31-6, 519-526.

[31] Williams, S.R. (1990) "Existence and Convergence of Equilibria in the Buyer's Bid Double Auction" Review
     of Economic Studies.

[32] Wilson, R.B. (1985) "Incentive Efficiency of Double Auctions" Ecollometrica53-5, 1101-1116.

[33] Wilson, R.B. (1987) "On Equilibria of Bid-Ask Markets" in G. Feiwell (ed.) Arrow and the Ascent of
     Modern Economic TlIeory 375-414. The MacMillan Press, Ltd.
                                                                                                                        39

Appendix: Explanation of the 4·Way Breakdown of Efficiency Losses

Efficiency losses in any DA game can be decomposed into the following four categories:


  1M: value oflost surplus of non-traded intra-marginal tokens (i.e. those that lie to the left ofthe equilibrium quantity,
      q*) when the actual number of trades q is less than q* (or 0 otherwise),

  EM: value of lost surplus due to trade of extra-marginal tokens (i.e. those that lie to the right of q* on the supply
      and demand curves) when the actual number of trades q is greater than q * (or 0 otherwise),

  BS: value of lost surplus due to trades of extra-marginal buyers' tokens that displaced potential trades of an equal
      number of buyers' intra-marginal tokens,

   SS: value of lost surplus due to trades of extra-marginal seller's tokens that displaced potential trades of an equal
       number of sellers' intra-marginal tokens.


       In order to define these quantities, we first define 1MB and IMS as the sum of the values of all intra-marginal
tokens not traded by buyers and sellers, respectively, during the period. Let EMB and EMS denote the sum of the
values of all extra-marginal tokens traded by buyers and sellers during the period. Then we have:


                    LOST SURPLUS = SURPLUS - PROFIT = 1MB - EMB + EMS - IMS                                             (1)


       Let NIMB, NIMS denote the number of intra-marginal tokens that failed to be traded by buyers and sellers,
respectively. Let NEMB and NEMS denote the number of extra-marginal tokens traded for the two respective sides of
tile market. Then we also have the identity


                                    q - q* = NEMB - NlMB = NEMS - NIMS                                                  (2)

Clearly when q = q* there are no net intra-marginal or extra-marginal trades, so that EM=IM=O. Then the total amount
oflost surplus can then be unambiguously divided into the two categories BS = 1MB - EMB and SS = EMS - IMS.
However if q > q*, then we face the problem of how to allocate lost surplus dne to trades of extra-marginal tokens
among the three categories EM, BS, and SS, and if q < q * we face a similar problem of allocating lost surplus among
the categories 1M, BS, and SS. Define NBS, NSS, NEM, NIM as follows:


                                              NEM = max(q - q*.O)

                                              NIM = max(q* - q,O)

                                              NBS = min(NIMB,NEMB)

                                              NSS = min(NIMS,NEMS)                                                      (3)
                                                                                                                   40

       Then it is easy to see that the following identities hold:


                                                 NIMB = NIM + NBS

                                                 NEMB = NEM + NBS

                                                  NIMS = NIM + NSS

                                                 NEMS = NEM + NSS                                                 (4)


       Definition (3) provides an unambiguous way of decomposing the total number of inefficient trades into the 4
categories BS, SS, EM, and 1M. There is no unambiguous way of deciding of decomposing the value of lost surplus,
however. For example in the DA game illustrated in figure 3.2 buyer B2 u'aded two extra-marginal tokens and there
are 3 intra-marginal tokens that Bland B2 failed to trade, and 1 intra-marginal token that S3 failed to trade. Thus,
NEM=O, NIM=I, NBS=2, and NSS=O, which implies that EM=O and SS=O. To compute the value of BS and 1M,
we need to determine which of the 3 intra-marginal buyer's tokens were "bumped". We assume that anyone of these
tokens is equally likely to have been bumped, and thus we value each "bumped" buyer's token at IMB/3 and compute
BS as the value of B3's two extra-marginal tokens less 21MS/3. 1M is computed as IMB/3 less the value of S3's
untraded token. More generally EM, 1M, BS and SS can be defined as follows:


                                              EM = NEM (EMS - EMB)

                                               1M = NIM (1MB - IMS)

                                               BS = NBS (1MB - EMB)

                                                SS = NSS (EMS - IMS)                                               (5)

where EMS == EMS/ max(NEMS, 1) is the average value of extra-marginal sellers' tokens, and IMS, EMB, and 1MB
are defined similarly. Using identities (1) through (4) it is easy to verify that the definitions of EM, 1M, BS and SS
insure that they are always non-negative, and that the following identity holds:


                                       SURPLUS LOST = EM + 1M + BS + SS.                                           (6)
