GAMES AND ECONOMIC BEHAVIOR 22, 1]29 Ž1998.
ARTICLE NO. GA970576

Price Formation in Double AuctionsU
Steven Gjerstad†
Hewlett-Packard Laboratories, Palo Alto, California 94304

and
John Dickhaut
Carlson School of Management, Uni¨ ersity of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455
Received November 30, 1995

We develop a model of information processing and strategy choice for participants in a double auction. Sellers in this model form beliefs that an offer will be
accepted by some buyer. Similarly, buyers form beliefs that a bid will be accepted.
These beliefs are formed on the basis of observed market data, including frequencies of asks, bids, accepted asks, and accepted bids. Then traders choose an action
that maximizes their own expected surplus. The trading activity resulting from
these beliefs and strategies is sufficient to achieve transaction prices at competitive equilibrium and complete market efficiency after several periods of trading.
Journal of Economic Literature Classification Numbers: D41, D44, D8 Q 1998
Academic Press

1. INTRODUCTION
The double auction ŽDA. is one of the most common exchange institutions, used extensively in stock markets such as the New York Stock
Exchange, commodity markets such as the Chicago Mercantile Exchange,
and in markets for financial instruments, including options and futures.
The prevalence of this institution can be traced to its operational simplicity, efficiency, and its capacity to respond quickly to changing market
conditions. Nevertheless, the DA is a persistent puzzle in economic theory.
* We thank Vernon Smith and Arlington Williams for providing data for comparison with
the model in this paper. We thank Dan Friedman, Leo Hurwicz, John Ledyard, Kevin
McCabe, Charlie Plott, Jason Shachat, Vernon Smith, Arlington Williams, and Steve Williams
for helpful discussions. We also would like to thank two referees for several useful suggestions. We especially thank Jim Jordan for his help with the formulation of this model as an
informationally decentralized decision process.
†
E-mail: gjerstad@hpl.hp.com.
1
0899-8256r98 $25.00
Copyright Q 1998 by Academic Press
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.

2

GJERSTAD AND DICKHAUT

How is information that is held separately by many market participants}in
the form of privately known reservation values and marginal costs}quickly
and accurately coordinated through the trading process to reach the
competitive equilibrium ŽCE. price and allocation?
In the double auction, any seller may at any time Žduring a specified
trading period. submit an offer that is then observed simultaneously by all
buyers and sellers. Similarly, any buyer may submit a bid that is observed
by the other buyers and by the sellers. When a buyer’s bid is acceptable to
some seller, that seller may then accept the buyer’s bid, and a trade is
executed between the buyer whose bid was accepted and the seller who
accepted this bid. Similarly, buyers may accept a seller’s offer at any time.
Market experiments have established that transaction prices converge
quickly to a competitive equilibrium price in the DA for a wide variety of
market environments. Experimental investigation of trader behavior and
market performance in the DA began with Smith Ž1962.. Smith induced
supply and demand conditions by giving buyers a redemption value for
each unit of an abstract commodity purchased, and by giving sellers a cost
for each unit of this abstract commodity sold. Buyers receive a surplus
equal to the difference between their redemption value and the purchase
price negotiated with a seller, and sellers receive a surplus equal to the
difference between the purchase price paid by the buyer and their unit
cost. Since reservation prices}and therefore supply and demand conditions}are known to the experimenter when this procedure is employed,
the procedure makes possible a comparison between experimental outcomes and theoretical predictions. The basic result observed in these
experiments is that prices do converge quickly to within a few cents of
competitive equilibrium prices in markets with stationary supply and
demand. Smith and many other economists in the 35 years since his initial
studies have also documented features of the path of convergence to
equilibrium in a variety of market environments. For surveys and interpretation of these experimental results, see Plott Ž1982. and Smith Ž1982..
Models of trader behavior in the DA have been constructed by several
authors, including Easley and Ledyard Ž1993., Friedman Ž1991., Gode and
Sunder Ž1993., and Wilson Ž1987.. Although these models have furthered
understanding of the interaction of individual behavior and institution in
the DA, we provide a model that accounts for several important regularities of double auction data that no one of the previous models predicts or
replicates in simulations. For comparison of the predictions of the last
three models with properties of experimental data, see Cason and Friedman Ž1993, 1996..
We model individual behavior of sellers and buyers in a continuous DA
and demonstrate that the persistent puzzle of convergence to CE prices
and allocations in the DA can be resolved with traders whose information

PRICE FORMATION IN DOUBLE AUCTIONS

3

processing and strategy choices are simple and intuitive. For each possible
bid, each buyer forms a subjective belief that some some seller will accept
the bid. The buyer then determines which bid will maximize her own
expected surplus. Similarly, each seller determines which offer will maximize his expected surplus. Subjective beliefs are formed using only observed market activity, including bids, offers, and accepts of bids and
offers. This procedure does not require any knowledge of the types Žcosts
and valuations. of other buyers and sellers; in fact, traders in this model do
not even have beliefs about the types of others. Nevertheless, this behavior
results in efficient allocations, and convergence of transaction prices to
within a few cents of CE prices within several periods of trading. In
addition, these beliefs respond quickly to changes in market conditions,
such as shifts in market demand or supply.
The organization of the paper is as follows. The model is formulated in
Section 2. Simulations of the model are shown and some important
statistical properties of these simulations are reported in Section 3. Section
4, the conclusion, summarizes the relationship between our model and
experimental data.

2. THE MODEL
Like most forms of market organization, the double auction is an
informationally decentralized system. Our model emphasizes this structure
to give a more compelling answer to Hayek’s question: How is privately
held information coordinated through the market process? Hurwicz et al.
Ž1975. have shown that in general equilibrium environments, even with
nonconvexities, there are simple and intuitive forms of market organization and bidding behavior Žwhich they call the B process. that lead to
Pareto optimal outcomes. Gjerstad and Shachat Ž1996. construct a map
between partial equilibrium environments of standard market experiments
and general equilibrium economies. In this paper, we develop a model of
informationally decentralized bargaining for these environments that results not only in Pareto optimal outcomes, but also in substantial stability
of transaction prices. Our bargaining model, together with the general
equilibrium interpretation of the environments considered here, results in
a model of learning competitive equilibrium in a class of general equilibrium environments.
In this section, we describe the elements of a microeconomic system,
interpret the double auction environment and institution within this
framework, and construct an informationally decentralized model of trader
behavior for these environments in the double auction institution.

4

GJERSTAD AND DICKHAUT

The double auction is an example of a microeconomic system, as in
Hurwicz Ž1972. and Smith Ž1982.. The primary features of a microeconomic system are the en¨ ironment e, consisting of the characteristics of the
economic agents, and the institution I, which includes the messages that
traders may send to one another, the allocation rules, and the adjustment
process rules. A microeconomy is an economic system S s (e, I), together
with behavioral actions b i for market participants, as shown in Fig. 1.
The environment e consists of a set A s  1, 2, . . . , n4 of agents, and for
each agent i characteristics e i consisting of that agent’s preferences,
technology, and endowment. The environment is then e s Ł i g A e i. The
institution I consists of a message space M i for each agent, an adjustment
process rule specifying the sequence of agent messages, and an outcome
function or allocation function hŽ m t . s Ž h1 Ž m t ., h2 Ž m t ., . . . , h n Ž m t ..,
where m t s Ž m1t , m2t , . . . , m nt . g Mt s Ł i g A Mti is the vector of agents’
messages.
According to Smith Ž1982, p. 930.,
We want to measure messages because we want to be able to identify the
behavioral modes, b i Ž e i, I ., revealed by the agents and test hypotheses derived
from theories about agent behavior.

When an environment e and an institution I are specified in a market
experiment, and an outcome X is observed, the only elements remaining to
be specified are the behavioral actions  b i Ž Ht ¬ e i , I.4i g A where Ht is the
history of activity observed by agents through time t. The focus of the
research in this paper is to specify forms of behavior  b i Ž Ht ¬ e i, I.4i g A that
are consistent with observations X from exchange environments e when
the institution I is the double auction. We now describe a representation
of the double auction in terms of this framework.

FIGURE 1

PRICE FORMATION IN DOUBLE AUCTIONS

5

2.1. En¨ ironment
In the double auction market environments we consider, there are two
goods: an experimental currency X and a fictitious commodity Y. Our
theory addresses the case of markets with the set of traders partitioned
into a group I of sellers and a group J of buyers. Both types of agents
Žsellers and buyers. are assumed to have preferences over monetary
rewards that are monotonically increasing.
Seller i g I has a vector of induced unit costs c i s Ž c 1i , c i2 , . . . , c im i . for
production of an abstract commodity. here c 1i is the cost to seller i of the
first unit sold, c i2 is the cost of the second unit, and so on. We index the
cost of each unit because the model of trader behavior is developed for
traders who frequently sell Žor purchase. multiple units. The gain to seller
i on his kth unit sold is the difference ps,k i Ž pk , c ik . s pk y c ik between the
price pk received from a buyer for that unit, and the cost c ik at which the
unit is produced. If seller i sells m i F m i units at prices p1 , p 2 , . . . , pm i ,
mi Ž
then the utility to this seller is Us, i ŽÝ ks1
pk y c ik .., where Us, i Ž?. is mono1
tonically increasing.
Gjerstad and Shachat Ž1996. ŽGS96. show that the cost vector of each
seller i g I is dual to a technology that is described by a production
i c i . A seller with an endowment v
function f i Ž x .. Let x s, i G Ýims1
i
s, i s
Ž x s, i , 0. will have sufficient currency Žthe input good. to produce each of
the m i units for which he has finite cost. Then characteristics of seller i
are described by the vector e s, i s Ž f i , v s, i .. In Example 1 below, we carry
out their construction for one seller in a market experiment.
Buyer j g J has a vector of unit valuations ¨ j s Ž ¨ j1, ¨ j2 , . . . , ¨ jn j .,
where ¨ j1 is the redemption value for the first unit acquired, ¨ j2 is the
redemption value for the second, and so forth. Buyer j has an endowment
x b, j of trading currency that is sufficient to purchase each unit at a price
j ¨ 1 . Monetary
up to the redemption value of the unit, i.e., x b, j G Ý nls1
j
rewards for buyers are the difference p b,l j Ž pl , ¨ jl . s ¨ jl y pl between the
redemption values of units purchased and the price pl paid to a seller. If
buyer j purchases n j F n j units at prices p1 , p 2 , . . . , pn j the monetary gain
j Ž ¨ l y p ., and the utility of this monetary
from trading for buyer j is Ýnls1
j
l
n
l
j Ž ¨ y p .., where U
Ž
.
gain is Ub, j ŽÝ ls1
?
is monotonically increasing.
j
l
b, j
For any vector of valuations ¨ j , GS96 show that there is a quasi-linear
utility function u j Ž x, y . s x q ¨ j Ž y . y x j and an endowment v j s Ž x j , 0.

1
In Section 2.4.6, where sellers’ strategies are formulated, we assume that seller i attempts
to maximize surplus on each of his m i units separately and in sequence.

6

GJERSTAD AND DICKHAUT

such that the demand for good X by this buyer is ¨ j . The characteristics of
buyer j are then e b, j s Ž u j , v b, j .. In Example 1, we carry out their
construction for one buyer in a market experiment.
We describe the environment of an induced cost and valuation experiment by the collection
e s  Ž f i , v s, i . 4 igI j  Ž u j , v b , j . 4 jgJ .
EXAMPLE 1. Figure 2 shows supply and demand conditions for market
trading experiment 3pda01 run in the experimental lab at the University of
Arizona by Vernon Smith and Arlington Williams. In this market there are
four buyers, each with positive valuations for three units, and four sellers,
each with finite costs for three units. The vector of buyers’ valuations is
f s   3.30, 2.25, 2.104 ,  2.80, 2.35, 2.204 ,

 2.60, 2.40, 2.154 ,  3.05, 2.35, 2.304 4 .
The vector of sellers’ cost is
c s   1.90, 2.35, 2.504 ,  1.40, 2.45, 2.604 ,

 2.10, 2.30, 2.554 ,  1.65, 2.35, 2.404 4 .
Since buyer j with redemption value ¨ jl makes a monetary gain at any
purchase price p - ¨ jl , and since buyers’ preferences are assumed to be
monotonically increasing in monetary gain, this buyer is willing to pay any
price up to ¨ jl for the lth unit purchased. Therefore, the demand shown in
Fig. 2 is determined by arraying the buyers’ redemption value vectors.
Supply is obtained analogously.

FIGURE 2

PRICE FORMATION IN DOUBLE AUCTIONS

7

The diagram on the left of Fig. 3 shows the production function f 1Ž x .
that is dual to the cost vector c1 s  1.90, 2.35, 2.504 for seller 1 in this
market, where

¡xr1.90

f 1Ž x . s

~ Ž x q 0.45. r2.35

¢3

Ž x q 0.75. r2.50

0 F s F 1.90
1.90 - x F 4.25
4.25 - x F 6.75
6.75 - x.

Ž 1.

We assume that seller 1 has an endowment v s, 1 s Ž x s, 1 , 0., where x s, 1 is
large enough to produce all three units. It is easy to verify that the supply
of a cost-minimizing producer with the production function f 1 will be 0
units if the price is below 1.90, 1 unit if the price is between 1.90 and 2.35,
and so on, so the seller’s vector of unit costs is dual to the production
function in Eq. Ž1.. The characteristics of seller 1 are then e 1 s Ž f 1 , v s, 1 ..
The diagram on the right of Fig. 3 shows two indifference curves for
buyer 1, whose vector of unit valuations is ¨ 1 s  3.30, 2.25, 2.104 . For buyer
1, define the valuation function ¨ 1 by

¡3.30 y

~

2.25 y q 1.05
¨ 1Ž y . s
2.10 y q 1.35
7.65

¢

0FyF1
1-yF2
2-yF3
3 - y.

Ž 2.

If we assume that buyer 1 has the endowment v b, 1 s Ž x b, 1 , 0. s Ž7.65, 0.
and that the utility function of buyer 1 is u1Ž x, y . s x q ¨ 1Ž y . y 7.65, then
the lower indifference curve in Fig. 3 corresponds to u1 s 0 and the upper
one to u1 s 1.
If the production functions and endowments of the remaining three
sellers and the utility functions and endowments of the other 3 buyer are

FIGURE 3

8

GJERSTAD AND DICKHAUT

4
constructed in this way, then the environment is e s Ž f i , v s, i .4is1
j
4
Ž u j , v b, j .4js1. In what follows, we refer to this market as the symmetric
market design.

Trading Periods
A typical laboratory market experiment involves trading over several
periods. Each seller has costs induced for the trading period, and each
buyer has valuations induced. A buyer’s valuation for a unit remains in
effect throughout the trading period or until the buyer transacts that unit.
After a unit is transacted, the seller’s cost and the buyer’s valuation for the
unit just transacted are removed from the supply and demand schedules,
trading continues, and this process proceeds until there are no more
surplus enhancing trades remaining, or until time expires in the trading
period. At the conclusion of a trading period, the costs and valuations are
reinitialized}possibly at different amounts}in the subsequent period. In
market experiment 3pda01, the supply and demand conditions in Fig. 2
were employed in each of nine trading periods, each lasting 300 sec.
2.2. Institution
In the double auction, sellers post ask prices and buyers post bids. The
message space defines the set of allowable messages for each agent. In this
paper we consider the double auction with a bid]ask spread reduction rule
Ždefined below.. In effect, this produces restrictions on agents’ messages as
a function of some previous messages of other agents. In a microeconomic
system, adjustment process rules specify the set of allowable messages for
each trader, the time when exchange of message begins, a transition rule
governing the sequencing and exchange of messages, and a stopping rule.
The DA imposes no restrictions on the sequencing of messages: any trader
can send a message at any time during the trading period. Allocation of
units is by mutual consent between any buyer and seller. If a seller’s ask is
acceptable to a buyer, then a transaction is completed when the buyer
takes Žaccepts. the seller’s ask. Similarly, a buyer’s bid may be accepted by
a seller.
DEFINITION 1 ŽMESSAGE SPACE.. Let N˜ s  x : x s nr100 for n g N 4 .
˜
Seller i at time t has a message space Mts, i, where Mts, i ;  i4 =  04 = N.
b, j
b, j
˜
Buyer j has a message space Mt , where Mt ;  04 =  j4 = N.
DEFINITION 2 ŽASKS.. An ask a by seller i is an amount that seller i is
willing to accept from a buyer as payment for a unit of the commodity
being traded. To submit an ask of a seller i sends the message Ž i, 0, a..

PRICE FORMATION IN DOUBLE AUCTIONS

9

DEFINITION 3 ŽBIDS.. A bid b by buyer j is an amount that buyer j is
willing to pay to some seller for a unit. Buyer j submits this bid by sending
the message Ž0, j, b ..
DEFINITION 4 ŽSPREAD REDUCTION RULE.. The lowest ask in the market at any time is called the outstanding ask and is denoted oa. At any
time sellers may place an ask a g N˜ with a - oa. The highest bid is called
the outstanding bid ob. At any time, buyers may make a bid b g N˜ above
the outstanding bid. The outstanding ask oa and outstanding bid ob define
the bid]ask spread w ob, oax. In markets with a spread reduction rule, all
bids and asks must fall within the bid]ask spread.
Note that in a double auction with the bid]ask spread reduction rule,
any ask that is permissible must be lower than the current outstanding ask,
so each new ask either results in a trade or it becomes the new outstanding
ask. A similar remark applies to bids.
DEFINITION 5 ŽACCEPTANCE.. If seller i sends the message Ž i, 0, a. and
holds the outstanding ask oa s a, then a take of oa by buyer j is an
agreement by j to purchase a unit from seller i at the transaction price
p s oa. Buyer j accepts the outstanding ask oa by sending the message
Ž0, j, b ., where b G oa. Similarly, if the outstanding bid ob is held by buyer
jX , then a take of ob by seller iX is an agreement by iX to sell a unit to buyer
jX at the transaction price p s ob.
2.3. Obser¨ ed History Ž Outcome.
EXAMPLE 2 ŽMESSAGES AND HISTORIES.. Consider the market of Example 1 depicted in Fig. 2. If the first action in the period is an offer of 3.00
by seller 3, we indicate this with the message m1 s Ž3, 0, 3.00.. Suppose
that the next action is a bid of 3.00 by buyer 1, which we indicate with the
message m 2 s Ž0, 1, 3.00.. At this point a trade is completed between seller
3 and buyer 1 at the price 3.00. We indicate the history of these two
messages by the list
H 2 s  h1 , h 2 4
s  Ž 3, 0, 3.00. , Ž 3, 1, 3.00. 4 .
Note that in H2 the triple h 2 unambiguously denotes an accept by buyer 1
of the offer of 3.00 made with message 1 by seller 3, because seller 3 holds
the outstanding offer of 3.00, which is the transaction price. ŽSee Accept of
oa in Definition 6..
DEFINITION 6 ŽHISTORIES.. After n messages have been sent, there will
be a history Hn consisting of n ordered triples. For any message m nq1 s
Ž m nq 1, 1 , m nq1, 2 , m nq1, 3 . that is sent, one of six cases will hold:

10

GJERSTAD AND DICKHAUT

In¨ alid ask or bid. A message m nq 1 s Ž i, 0, a. is not valid if a G oa.
An invalid ask will not be included in the history. In effect, the institution
ignores messages that violate the spread reduction rule. Similarly, a
message m nq 1 s Ž0, j, b . is not valid if b F ob.
No ask outstanding. If no ask has been made since the last transaction,
then there is no outstanding ask, and any ask a g N˜ is valid. If in addition,
m nq 1, 3 ) ob, then h nq1 s m nq1.
No bid outstanding. Similarly, if no bid has been made since the last
transaction, then there is no outstanding bid, and any bid b g N˜ is valid. If
m nq 1, 3 - oa, then h nq1 s m nq1.
Accept of ob. If m nq 1, 1 / 0 and m nq1, 3 F ob, then seller m nq1, 1 is
making an offer at or below ob, so m nq 1 is an accept of ob. The buyer’s
identity is found by looking back in Hn and finding the last h k with
h k, 2 / 0, that is, kU s max k : h k, 2 / 04 . Then Ž h nq1, 1 , h nq1, 2 , h nq1, 3 . s
Ž m nq 1, 1 , h k U , 2 , ob ..
Accept of oa. If m nq 1, 2 / 0 and m nq1, 3 G oa, then m nq1 is an accept
of oa Žby buyer m nq 1, 2 .. The seller’s identity is found by looking back in
Hn and finding kU s max k : h k, 1 / 04 . Then Ž h nq1, 1 , h nq1, 2 , h nq1, 3 . s
Ž h k U , 1 , m nq1, 2 , oa..
Impro¨ ing ask or bid. If m nq 1, 3 g Ž ob, oa. then m nq1 is either an
improving ask, or an improving bid, and h nq 1 s m nq1.
2.4. Beha¨ ior
2.4.1. Frequencies of Takes
As noted in Section 2.1, sellers attempt to maximize ps,k i Ž pk , c ik . and
buyers attempt to maximize p b,l j Ž pl , ¨ jl .. Since asks or bids must be
accepted for a transaction to take place, we take the point of view that
sellers will maximize expected surplus myopically, where the expectation is
taken relative to beliefs pŽ a. that an ask a will be accepted by some buyer.
These beliefs are formed on the basis of observed market data Žas
described in Section 2.4.2.. Similarly, buyers are assumed to maximize
expected surplus myopically, where the expectation is taken relative to
beliefs q Ž b . that a bid b will be accepted by some seller.
The history that traders consider in forming beliefs is restricted to those
messages leading up to the last L transactions, where L g  0, 1, 2, . . . 4 .
The parameter L is the memory length of traders. Note that the numbers
of messages remembered and the clock time elapsed within the traders’
memory may vary, while the number of trades completed within the
traders’ memory does not vary Žonce L trades have occurred.. The next

PRICE FORMATION IN DOUBLE AUCTIONS

11

definition provides a procedure for truncating the history, so that beliefs
can be constructed using the data within the traders’ memories. The
procedure for constructing beliefs using this Žtruncated. history is described in Section 2.4.2.
Note 1. We will work with the vector Hn , although traders do not have
access to all of the information in Hn . Traders know their own asks or
bids, but do not know the identity of the trader making other bids or asks.
Information about identities is not used in the formation of beliefs or
strategies, so use of Hn is made only to avoid complicating notation.
DEFINITION 7 ŽREMEMBERED HISTORY.. Let Hn be the space of possible history vectors of length n. Given Hn g Hn , we make the following
definitions:
Trade function. For a vector Hn , define a function T : Hn ¬  0, 14 n by
setting Tk Ž Hn . s Ih k, 1 ?h k, 2 ) 04Ž h k .. Then each component Tk of T indicates
whether a trade occurred in the kth element of the history.
Number of trades. Let x s Ž x 1 , x 2 , . . . , x n .. For each n, define Sn :
 0, 14 n ¬ N by SnŽ x . s Ý nks1 x k . Then SnŽT Ž Hn .. is the number of trades
resulting from the first n messages.
Remembered history. Let L be the memory length of a given trader.
For fixed n and Hn , to simplify notation, let S s S nŽT Ž Hn ... Let nX be the
position of trade S y L if S ) L, and let nX s 0 if S F L. Define H˜nŽ L. by
H˜nŽ L. s  h nXq1 , h nXq2 , . . . , h n4 .
Deletion of oa and ob from history. Let nY s max k : Tk Ž Hn . s 14 , i.e.,
n is the index of the most recent trade. Let nU be the index of the lowest
Žmost recent. ask in the vector  h nYq1 , . . . , h n4 . Let n# be the index of the
highest bid in the vector  h nYq1 , . . . , h n4 . Note that if TnŽ Hn . s 0, then h n, 3
is either the outstanding ask or the outstanding bid, as a consequence of
the spread reduction rule, and if TnŽ Hn . s 1, then there is no outstanding
bid and no outstanding ask. If TnŽ Hn . s 0 and h n, 1 s 0, then h n, 3 is the
outstanding bid. If h k, 1 / 0 for some k g  nY q 1, . . . , n y 14 , then nU / B
and we define HnŽ L. by HnŽ L. '  h nXq1 , h nXq2 , . . . , h nU y1 , h nU q1 , . . . , h ny1 4 .
That is, HnŽ L. is H˜nŽ L. with h nU and h n# removed. This is done because it is
not known at time n if the outstanding ask or bid will be accepted. The
other case}where h n, 3 is the outstanding ask}is treated similarly. Then
HnŽ L. is the history remembered by traders with memory length L who
observe the history Hn .
Y

Set of asks and bids. Let DnŽ L. be the set of all asks and bids that have
been made in HnŽ L., i.e., DnŽ L. ' Dk g nXq1, . . . , n4_n#, nU 4  h k, 34 .

12

GJERSTAD AND DICKHAUT

DEFINITION 8 ŽASK FREQUENCIES.. For each d g DnŽ L., let AŽ d . be the
total number of asks that have been made at d, and let TAŽ d . be the total
number of these that have been accepted. Let RAŽ d . ' AŽ d . y TAŽ d . be
the rejected asks at d.
For AŽ d ., the counting procedure is as follows. For each k g  nX q
1, . . . , n4 _ n#, nU 4 , if h k, 3 s d, h k, 1 / 0, and h k, 2 s 0, then AŽ d . is incremented by 1. If h k, 3 s d and Tk Ž h k . s 1, then h k is either a taken ask or a
taken bid. To determine which is the case, find mU s min m G 1 : h ky m, 3
s h k, 34 . If h kymU , 1 / 0, then AŽ d . and TAŽ d . are incremented by 1. The
rejected asks at d are given by RAŽ d . ' AŽ d . y TAŽ d ..
DEFINITION 9 ŽBID FREQUENCIES.. For each d g DnŽ L., let B Ž d . be the
total number of bids that have been made at d, and let TB Ž d . be the total
number of these that have been accepted. Let RB Ž d . ' B Ž d . y TB Ž d ..
The interpretations and counting procedures for B Ž d ., TB Ž d ., and RB Ž d .
are analogous to those described in Definition 8 for asks.
At each time during a market, the proportion of asks at a g D that have
been accepted is

ˇp Ž a. s

TA Ž a .
AŽ a.

whenever AŽ a. ) 0. The proportion of bids at b g D that have been
accepted is
qˇŽ b . s

TB Ž b .
BŽ b.

whenever B Ž b . ) 0.
In stationary market environments, these empirical frequencies show
substantial regularity: ˇ
pŽ a. tends to be a decreasing function of a and qˇŽ b .
tends to be an increasing function of b.
Note 2. In what follows, the sets of asks and bids are frequently
denoted D, with the subscripts and superscripts omitted. When traders
have finite memory, that will be noted. After n messages have been sent,
the relevant set of asks and bids is DnŽ L. and the relevant history is HnŽ L..
2.4.2 Beliefs
While the frequencies ˇ
pŽ a. and qˇŽ b . tend to be monotonic when the
number of asks and bids is large, there is more variability in small samples.
For this reason, it is useful to work with a modification of these summary
statistics.

13

PRICE FORMATION IN DOUBLE AUCTIONS

Modification of ˇ
pŽ a. is made by taking the point of view that if an ask
aX - a is rejected, then had that ask been made at a it would also have
been rejected. This assumption is made because a ) aX and is therefore
less appealing to buyers than aX , which was rejected. Similarly, if ask aX ) a
was made and taken, then that ask would also have been taken if it were
made at a. Furthermore, if a bid bX ) a is made, then an ask aX s bX would
have been taken if it had been made Žthe assumption being that this ask of
aX would be acceptable to the buyer who bid bX .. This heuristic }and an
analogous one for buyers’ beliefs}are formalized in the next two definitions.
DEFINITION 10 ŽSELLERS’ BELIEFS.. For each potential as a g D, define

ˆp Ž a. s

Ý d G aTA Ž d . q Ý d G a B Ž d .
Ý d G aTA Ž d . q Ý d G a B Ž d . q Ý d F a RAŽ d .

.

Ž 3.

Then ˆ
pŽ a. is the seller’s belief that an ask amount a will be acceptable
to some buyer. We assume that sellers always believe that an ask at
a s 0.00 will be accepted with certainty, and that there is some value
M ) 0 such that ˆ
pŽ M . s 0.
The notation of Eq. Ž3. is simplified by the following definitions. Let
TAGŽ a. s Ý d G aTAŽ d ., BGŽ a. s Ý d G a B Ž d ., and RALŽ a. s Ý d F a RAŽ d ..
These are the taken asks greater than or equal to a, the bids greater than
or equal to a, and the rejected asks less than or equal to a, respectively.
Then Eq. Ž3. may be rewritten as

ˆp Ž a. s

TAG Ž a . q BG Ž a .
TAG Ž a . q BG Ž a . q RAL Ž a .

.

Ž 4.

DEFINITION 11 ŽBUYERS’ BELIEFS.. For each possible bid b g D, define
qˆŽ b . s

Ý d F b TB Ž d . q Ý d F b A Ž d .
Ý d F b TB Ž d . q Ý d F b A Ž d . q Ý d G b RB Ž d .

.

Ž 5.

We assume that buyers always believe that qˆŽ0.00. s 0 and that there is
some value M ) 0 such that qˆŽ M . s 1.
As in Definition 10, to simplify notation in Eq. Ž5. we introduce
functions TBLŽ b . s Ý d F b TB Ž d ., ALŽ b . s Ý d F b AŽ d ., and RBGŽ b . s
Ý d G b RB Ž d .. These are the taken bids less than or equal to b, the asks less
than or equal to b, and the rejected bids greater than or equal to b. Then
qˆŽ b . s

TBL Ž b . q AL Ž b .
TBL Ž b . q AL Ž b . q RBG Ž b .

.

Ž 6.

14

GJERSTAD AND DICKHAUT

With the specification of seller’s beliefs in Definition 10, the belief
function ˆ
pŽ a. is a monotonically decreasing function of a ŽProposition 1..
The argument of pŽ?. is the price that the seller asks, and the value of pŽ?.
at a represents the seller’s assessment of the probability Žbelief. that an
offer at a will be accepted by some buyer. It is reasonable to expect that
seller’s beliefs are monotonic: this captures the intuition that a trader who
has seen an ask of a rejected should decrease the belief that a will be
accepted later, and decrease the belief that an ask at any value greater
than a will be accepted. The buyers’ belief function has an analogous
property: qˆŽ b . is a monotonically increasing function of the bid b.
2.4.3 Spread Reduction Rule and Beliefs
The spread reduction rule has the effect of making the probability of a
take for an ask a G oa equal to 0 Žwhere oa is the outstanding offer from
Definition 4.. We denote this modification of ˆ
pŽ a. by ˜
pŽ a., where ˜
pŽ a. s
ˆpŽ a. if a - oa, and ˜pŽ a. s 0 if a G oa. Similarly, q˜Ž b . s 0 for all b with
b F ob. These facts are incorporated into traders’ beliefs in the following
definition.
DEFINITION 12. Let ˜
pŽ a. s ˆ
pŽ a. ? Iw0, o a.Ž a. for each a g D. That is,
˜pŽ a. s ˆpŽ a. if a - oa and ˆpŽ a. s 0 if a G oa. For all b g D, let q˜Ž b . s
q˜Ž b . s qˆŽ b . ? IŽ o b, M xŽ b ..
2.4.4. Cubic Spline Interpolation
The belief functions in Definition 12 are defined on the set D of all
offers and bids within the traders’ memory. These beliefs are extended to
the positive reals using cubic spline interpolation. For each successive pair
of data points Ž a k , ˜
pŽ a k .. and Ž a kq1 , ˜
pŽ a kq1 .., we construct a cubic equation pŽ a. s a 3 a3 q a 2 a2 q a 1 a q a 0 passing through these two points
with the following four properties:
1.

pŽ a k . s ˜
pŽ a k .

2.

pŽ a kq 1 . s ˜
pŽ a kq1 .

3.

pX Ž a k . s 0

4.

pX Ž a kq 1 . s 0

These four conditions generate the four equations represented in matrix
Eq. Ž7. below. The coefficients a j are obtained as the solution to the

15

PRICE FORMATION IN DOUBLE AUCTIONS

equation
a3k

a2k

ak

1

a3kq 1

a2kq1

a kq1

1

3a2k

2 ak

1

0

3a2kq 1

2 a kq1

1

0

a3
˜p Ž ak .
a2
p Ž a kq 1 . .
s ˜
a1
0
a0
0

Ž 7.

The function q Ž b . is defined similarly, using the pairs Ž bk , q˜Ž bk .. and
Ž bkq 1 , q˜Ž bkq1 ...
2.4.5. Monotonicity of Beliefs
The function ˆ
pŽ a. defined in Section 2.4.2 is monotonically nonincreasing. That is, as the ask a is increased, ˆ
pŽ a. }the belief that an ask a will
be accepted}is nonincreasing in a. Similarly, qˆŽ b . is nondecreasing in b:
buyers believe higher bids are more likely to be accepted. These results are
proven in Propositions 1 and 2. This monotonicity property is extended
successively to ˜
pŽ a., q˜Ž b ., pŽ a., and q Ž b . in Propositions 3]6.
PROPOSITION 1.

For all a1 g D, a2 g D, with a1 - a2 , ˆ
pŽ a1 . G ˆ
pŽ a2 ..

Proof. Let GŽ a. s TAGŽ a. q BGŽ a.. Note that GŽ a2 . F GŽ a1 . and
RALŽ a1 . F RALŽ a2 . because a1 - a2 . Multiplying these two inequalities
results in
G Ž a2 . RAL Ž a1 . - G Ž a1 . RAL Ž a2 . .

Ž 8.

Now add GŽ a2 .GŽ a1 . to both sides of inequality Ž8. and from this sum
factor out GŽ a2 . from the left side of the equation and factor GŽ a1 . out of
the right side, then divide both sides of the resulting inequality by w GŽ a1 .
q RALŽ a1 .xw GŽ a2 . q RALŽ a2 .x to get ˆ
pŽ a1 . G ˆ
pŽ a2 .. B
PROPOSITION 2.

For all b1 g D, b 2 g D with b1 - b 2 , qˆŽ b1 . F qˆŽ b 2 ..

Proof. The proof is similar to the proof of Proposition 1. B
PROPOSITION 3. The function ˜
pŽ a. is nonincreasing.
Proof. Since ˜
pŽ a. s ˆ
pŽ a. Iw0, o a.Ž a., and since ˆ
pŽ a. is nonincreasing,
˜pŽ a. is also nonincreasing. B
PROPOSITION 4. The function q˜Ž b . is nondecreasing.
Proof. The proof is similar to the proof of Proposition 3. B
PROPOSITION 5. Let a1 g D and a2 g D, with a1 - a2 . Then pŽ a. is
nonincreasing on Ž a1 , a2 ..

16

GJERSTAD AND DICKHAUT

Proof. The belief function pŽ a. is given by pŽ a. s a 3 a3 q a2 a2 q a 1 a
q a 0 on the interval Ž a1 , a2 ., where the coefficients a j are given by the
solution to Eq. Ž7.. The slope of pŽ a. on this interval is
pX Ž a . s 3 a 3 a2 q 2 a 2 a q a 2 .

Ž 9.

The coefficients a 3 , a 2 and a 1 can be obtained from Eq. Ž7. by Cramer’s
rule. Substitution of these values into Eq. Ž9. results in
pX Ž a . s

6 Ž a2 y a1 . Ž p Ž a1 . y p Ž a2 . .

Ž a2 y a1 .

4

Ž a y a1 . Ž a y a2 . .

Note that a2 y a1 , pŽ a1 . y pŽ a2 ., and Ž a2 y a1 . 4 are all nonnegative.
Since a y a1 ) 0 and a y a2 - 0 on Ž a1 , a2 ., it follows that pŽ a. is
nonincreasing on Ž a1 , a2 .. B
PROPOSITION 6. The belief function q Ž b . is nondecreasing.
Proof. The proof is similar to the proof of Proposition 5. B
2.4.6. Expected Surplus Maximization
When attempting to sell his kth unit, seller i with cost c ik - oa may
make an offer a g w0, oa. that results in expected surplus Ewps,k i Ž a, c ik .x s
Ž a y c ik . ? pŽ a.. The maximum expected surplus of seller i for the sale of
this unit 2 is
S s,k i s max  max ag Ž o b , o a. E ps,k i Ž a, c ik . , 0 4 .

Ž 10 .

Similary, if buyer j with valuation ¨ jl for her lth unit bids b g Ž ob, `.,
this results in an expected surplus Ewp b,l j Ž b, ¨ jl .x s Ž ¨ jl y b . ? q Ž b .. The
maximum expected surplus on this unit for buyer j is
S bl , j s max max ag Ž o b , o a. E p bl , j Ž b, ¨ jl . , 0 .

½

5

Ž 11 .

2.4.7. Timing of Messages
Let t be the parameter for time within a trading period. Let T be the
length of the trading period and let tk g w0, T . be the time of the k th
offer, bid, or acceptance of an offer or bid. At time tk let Ts,ki be the
2
Seller i with cost vector c i s  c1i , c i2 , . . . , c im i 4, faces the problem of choosing a sequence
k
k.
k
i Ž
of asks or accepts to maximize Ý m
ks 1 pi y c i , where pi is the purchase price received for
unit k. We assume that the seller will attempt to maximize the surplus of each unit in
sequence, independently other units. In addition to simplifying the strategy choice, this is
consistent with the myopic formulation of strategy choice. A similar remark applies to buyers.

PRICE FORMATION IN DOUBLE AUCTIONS

17

random variable that specifies the time that seller i would allow to elapse
before sending a message; let Tb,k j be the random variable that specifies
the time that buyer j would allow to elapse before sending a message.
We assume that Ts,ki is exponentially distributed, and that the parameter
a s, i in the distribution of Ts,ki depends only on the maximum expected
surplus S s,k i of seller i Žfrom Eq. Ž10.. on the length T of the trading
period, and on tk , the time elapsed in the trading period. We write this
dependence as a s, i s f s, i Ž S s,k i ; tk , T .. Similarly, for buyers, b b, j s
f b, j Ž Sb,l j ; tk , T .. Then the probability that seller iX will be the next trader to
send a message in the market is

ps, iX s
s

f s, iX Ž S s,k iX ; tk , T .
Ý i g I f s, i Ž S s,k i ; tk , T . q Ý j g J f b , j Ž S bl , j ; tk , T .

a s, iX
Ý i g I a s, i q Ý j g J b b , j

.

Ž 12 .

Equation Ž12. indicates that the probability that seller iX is the next to send
a message is equal to the parameter a s, iX of seller iX divided by the sum of
the parameters of all agents. This is shown in the following proposition.
PROPOSITION 7. If Ts,ki and Tb,k j are independent exponentially distributed
random ¨ ariables on w0, `. with parameters a s, i s f s, i Ž S s,k i ; tk , T . and b b, j s
f b, j Ž Sb,l j ; tk , T ., i.e,
Pr  Ts, i - t 4 s 1 y eya s , i ?t ,
then the probability that seller iX will be the next trader to send a message is
ps, iX , where ps, iX is gi¨ en by Eq. Ž12..
Proof. Consider, for example, seller 1. Let
Ts, y1 s

min
i)1, jG1

 Ts, i , Tb , j 4 .

This random variable is exponentially distributed with parameter

a s, y1 s Ý a s, i q Ý b b , j .
i)1

jG1

18

GJERSTAD AND DICKHAUT

Then the probability that seller 1 is the next seller to move will be the
probability that Ts, 1 - Ts, y1 , i.e.,
ps, 1 s Pr  Ts, 1 - Ts, y1 4
s
s

`

u

H0 H0 a

ya s , 1?t
? a s, y1 ? ey a s , y 1?u dt du
s, 1 ? e

a s, 1
a s, 1 q a s, y1

.

Ž 13 .

After substitution of the definitions of a s, 1 and a s, y1 , the expression in
Eq. Ž13. is the same as Eq. Ž12. for iX s 1. B
There are two reasons for defining the timing of each trader’s message
as an exponential random variable. The first is an important conceptual
issue: with this formulation, the mechanism is informationally decentralized, in that the information about each trader’s surplus is not held by any
agent. Each trader’s timing decision is independents of any Žunobserved.
characteristics }such as costs or valuations}of other traders. The second
issue is empirical. With this formulation, the timing of bids and asks is
testable within the model, and it is possible to compare the timing data for
various specifications of the functions f s, i Ž S s,k i ; tk , T . and f b, j Ž Sb,l j ; t k , T .
with timing data from experiments. It should be noted that the arguments
of f s, i Ž?. may be any data observed by or known to seller i. In the
formulation above, the surplus S s,k i is a summary statistic derived from the
information privately held by and publicly observed by seller i.
The specifications of f s, i Ž S s,k i ; tk , T . and f b, j Ž S b,l j ; tk , T . used in the
simulations reported in Section 3 are
f s, i Ž S s,k i ; tk , T . s S s,k i ?

T

Ž 14 .

Ž T y atk .

and
f b , j Ž Sbl , j ; Tk , T . s Sbl , j ?

T

Ž T y atk .

,

Ž 15 .

where a g Ž0, 1..
This specification has been chosen to reflect two empirical observations
about timing of bids and offers in experimental markets. There is strong
positive rank-order correlation between buyers’ valuations and the order in
which buyers purchase units, and strong negative rank-order correlation
between sellers’ costs and the order in which units are sold. In the
formulation above, buyers with high valuations will have higher maximum

PRICE FORMATION IN DOUBLE AUCTIONS

19

expected surplus, and will therefore have a larger parameter b b, j for the
timing decision. Since the expected time until buyer j sends a message is
proportional to the reciprocal of b b, j , buyers with high valuations will tend
to send messages more frequently and will trade earlier. Similarly, sellers
with low costs will trade earlier. The second observation is that trading
activity is typically concentrated at the beginning of the trading period,
when many high surplus units are traded, and toward the end of the
period. The term TrŽT y atk . in Eqs. Ž14. and Ž15. is consistent with these
observations, since high surplus units will trade earlier, but as tk ª T, this
term approaches 1rŽ1 y a., and low surplus units will be traded toward
the close of each period if a is near 1.
Although the model is formulated so that timing data can be obtained
and examined, we have followed the reduced form in Eq. Ž12. in simulations and generated messages without the time stamp.
EXAMPLE 3 ŽBELIEFS, SURPLUS, AND TIMING.. Consider again the market of Example 1. In Example 2 we discuss the first two messages sent in
experiment 3pda01, which result in the history H2 s Ž3, 0, 3.00.,
Ž3, 1, 3.00.4 . The set of bids and offers D where the beliefs ˆ
pŽ a. and qˆŽ b .
are calculated is D s  3.004 j  0.00, 10.004 . The values of ˆ
pŽ a. at these
three points are ˆ
pŽ0.00. s 1.0, ˆ
pŽ3.00. s 1.0, and ˆ
pŽ10.00. s 0.0. The
values of qˆŽ b . at these three points are qˆŽ0.00. s 0.0, qˆŽ3.00. s 1.0, and
qˆŽ10.00. s 1.0. Since there is no outstanding ask or bid, the spread
reduction rule has no effect, so ˜
pŽ a. s ˆ
pŽ a. for all a g D and q˜Ž b . s qˆŽ b .
for all b g D. Finally, the belief functions pŽ a. and q Ž b ., shown in Fig. 4,
are

¡1

p Ž a. s

~

¢

0 F b F 3.00
1

343
0

Ž 100 q 180 x q 39 x 2 q 2 x 3 .

3.00 F b F 1.00 Ž 16 .
10.00 F b,

FIGURE 4

20

GJERSTAD AND DICKHAUT

and

qŽ b. s

¡1
¢1

~ 27 x Ž 3 y 2 x .
2

0.00 F b F 3.00

Ž 17 .

b ) 3.00.

After the trade between seller 3 and buyer 1 in this example, the lowest
cost units of sellers 1]4 are 1.90, 1.40, 2.30, and 1.65, respectively. The
highest unit values for buyers 1]4 are 2.25, 2.80, 2.60, and 3.05. The
expected surplus maximizing bids and offers and the maximum expected
surplus for each agent are easily determined from these values and costs
and the belief functions in Eqs. Ž16. and Ž17.. The values of the maximum
expected surplus for buyers 1]4 are 0.38, 0.66, 0.55, and 0.81. For sellers
1]4, the values of maximum expected surplus are 2.55, 2.91, 2.27, and 2.73.
As a result, given the formulation of the timing of messages in Eqs. Ž14.
and Ž15., in our model an offer will be more than 4 times as likely as a bid
with this history. Even if the next message is an offer, the expected surplus
of sellers will continue to be greater than the expected surplus for buyers,
and there is a high probability of a series of decreasing offers. As a result,
the next transaction price is likely to move toward the market equilibrium
of 2.35.

3. SIMULATIONS
While the formation of traders’ beliefs, their choices of strategies, and
the timing of messages are simple and intuitive, the dynamics of the model
are complex because of the nonstationarity of beliefs and the probability
distribution over the timing of agents’ messages. As a result, analytic
characterization of properties of the model is difficult to obtain. For this
reason, much of the evidence presented on the performance of the model
is from simulations. It may be possible to obtain analytic results on
asymptotic convergence of prices to an approximate equilibrium, but
asymptotic convergence alone does not provide information about the
path. For the important question of the path of convergence to equilibrium, simulations are useful tool for investigating properties of this model.
3.1. Criteria
The primary objective of this section is to demonstrate that prices and
allocations in our model converge to the competitive equilibrium price and
allocation. To identify the effect on convergence to competitive equilibrium of the belief formation and strategy choice defined in Section 2.4, we

PRICE FORMATION IN DOUBLE AUCTIONS

21

compare the outcomes of simulations of our model to the ‘‘zero-intelligence trade’’ ŽZI. model of Gode et al. Ž1993., which has no belief
formation or learning.3 By convergence of the sequence of prices, we mean
N
that for some n 0 G 1, each element of the sequence Ž pn . nsn
of transac0
tion prices is ‘‘close to’’ pe , the competitive equilibrium price. This condition is met if the mean absolute deviation of transaction price from
equilibrium price is small, so we measure convergence using this statistic.
Of course, convergence to competitive equilibrium implies convergence to
a Pareto optimum, so we also test this weaker condition. With efficiency
measured as the ratio of surplus extracted by agents to total surplus
possible, we find that in simulations of the model, market allocations are
nearly efficient Žover 99.9% of possible surplus is extracted after several
periods of trading., and prices are close to competitive equilibrium prices.
Note that while we do not examine the market allocation directly, the
outcome is a competitive equilibrium if and only if the transaction prices
are the competitive equilibrium price and the allocation is Pareto optimal,
and we do establish that these two conditions hold Žapproximately. in
simulations of our model.
3.2. En¨ ironments
Throughout this section, we consider a market design with four sellers,
each with finite unit costs for three units, and four buyers, each with
positive unit valuations for three units. The unit costs and valuations for
the design we consider are given in Example 1 of Section Ž2.1. and are
depicted in Fig. 2 Žand in the left column of Fig. 5.. We reported statistics
from seven laboratory market experiments reported initially by Ketcham
et al. Ž1984. and statistics from 100 simulations of our model with the same
environment parameters. Finally, to demonstrate that our model is capable
of responding to shifts in market conditions, we show the results of a
simulation in which the market design described above is employed through
five periods of trading, and then for the remaining five periods of the
simulation each unit cost and unit valuation are increased to amounts 0.50
above those employed in periods 1]5.
3.3. E¨ aluation
The only free parameter in the model is the memory length of traders.
We report simulations with memory length L s 5. For short memory
3

In this model, sellers make offers which are random and uniformly distributed on the
interval w c, M x, where c is the seller’s cost, and M is some upper bound on their set of
possible choices. Buyers make bids that are uniformly distributed on w0, ¨ x where ¨ is the
buyer’s valuation.

22

GJERSTAD AND DICKHAUT

FIGURE 5

lengths Ž L F 3. the outcomes are unstable. For long memory lengths
Ž L G 8. the outcomes are similar to those with intermediate memory
lengths Ž4 F L F 7., but computation time increases significantly. It should
also be noted that beliefs change more slowly in markets with shifts in
supply and demand if memory length is long, so traders with intermediate
and short memory lengths will adapt to changes in market conditions more
quickly.

23

PRICE FORMATION IN DOUBLE AUCTIONS

TABLE I
Efficiency Statistics from Simulations of Models and from Laboratory Data
Periods
evaluated

Symmetric
markets

Model
simulations

ZI Model
simulations

First two periods
Entire experiment
Last two periods

0.907
0.959
0.970

0.9982
0.9991
0.9992

0.968
0.968
0.967

Efficiency
The sum of consumers’ and producers’ surpluses provides a convenient
measure of efficiency for these markets. We evaluate the surplus obtained
by traders in the market divided by the maximum surplus available to
determine the efficiency of trade. Table I summarizes efficiency statistics
from the seven laboratory markets, from 100 simulations of our model, and
from 100 simulations of the ZI model. This table show that our model
attains higher efficiency than both the laboratory experiments and the ZI
model simulations.
Con¨ ergence
The diagrams in the left column of Fig. 5 show graphs of the supply and
demand conditions for the symmetric market 3pda01. On the right side of
that figure in the top row is a graph of the sequence of transaction price
through the nine periods of trading in this laboratory market. In that
figure, the equilibrium price is shown as a solid line across the diagram.
Prices from each of the nine trading periods are separated by a vertical
line, and the number of transactions in each period is indicated at the
bottom of the diagram below the vertical line that indicates the end of the
trading period. A simulation of our model under the same supply and
demand conditions is shown in the right side of Fig. 5 in the center row.
Price sequences from laboratory experiments with this design Žas in the top
of Fig. 5. and from simulations with this market design Žas in the center
row of Fig. 5. both converge quickly to prices near the competitive
equilibrium price, and an equilibrium quantity of trade typically occurs in
each period.
The belief functions pŽ a. and q Ž b . shown in Fig. 6 are produced using
data from the the end of the second period of the simulation of Fig. 5,
using Definitions 10 and 11 of Section 2.4.2. In this graph, a seller’s belief
that ask a will be accepted by a buyer is shown for each ask from 2.32 to

24

GJERSTAD AND DICKHAUT

FIGURE 6

2.38; buyers’ beliefs are shown for bids from 2.30 to 2.36.4 These belief
functions are monotonic Žsee Propositions 5 and 6., so the value of the
sellers’ belief is pŽ a. s 1 for all a - 2.33 and it is 0 for all a ) 2.38. With
this belief function, and with myopic surplus maximization, the optimal ask
is approximately 2.33 for any seller with unit cost below 2.30. The buyers’
belief functions in this case have a similar property: the optimal bid for a
buyer with valuation of 2.40 or greater is 2.35. At the beginning of each
period, the sellers’ costs are 1.90, 1.40, 2.10, and 1.65 and the buyers’
valuations are 3.30, 2.80, 2.60, and 3.05, so the first action at the beginning
of the third period will be either an ask of 2.33 or a bid at 2.35. We see in
the center row of Fig. 5 that the first transaction price is 2.35 in period 3 of
this simulation: the belief functions and strategy choice described frequently produce transactions at equilibrium, even from the beginning of
the trading period.
The figures in the bottom row of Fig. 5 show a simulation of the ZI
model in the symmetric market environment. While the ZI traders attain
high efficiency in this market design, that model does not result in the
formation of equilibrium prices. In the ZI model, there is no belief
formation process. As a result, there is no convergence of transaction
prices to equilibrium, as the diagram on the right side of the bottom row in
Fig. 5 clearly shows.5 In Table II, the mean absolute deviation of transac4
Note that the range from the lowest cost to the highest valuation in this market is 1.40 to
3.30, with an equilibrium price of 2.35; beliefs are focused in a narrow range around the
equilibrium price.
5
Gode and Sunder w1993, p. 129x argue: ‘‘By the end of a period, the price series in budget
constrained ZI trader markets converges to the equilibrium level almost as precisely as the
price series from human trader markets does.’’ In the ZI simulation of figure 5, final trades in
8 of 10 periods are within 0.10 of equilibrium. We apply a definition of convergence that is
more demanding and conforms more closely to the intuitive notion of convergence of market
prices. We argue that prices in a stable market environment converge if, after several periods,
the mean deviation of all trades from equilibrium is small. By this criterion, the ZI model
does not converge to equilibrium.

25

PRICE FORMATION IN DOUBLE AUCTIONS

TABLE II
Convergence Statistics from Simulations of Models and from Laboratory Data
Periods
evaluated

Symmetric
markets

Model
simulations

ZI Model
simulations

First two periods
Entire experiment
Last two periods

0.101
0.050
0.088

0.077
0.045
0.040

0.276
0.237
0.209

tion price from equilibrium price is shown for 100 simulations of the ZI
model in the symmetric market design.6 This statistic is also shown for 100
simulations of our model7 for the seven laboratory markets. These data
Žand the ZI simulation graph at the bottom of Fig. 5. show that the ZI
model does not result in convergence to competitive equilibrium. The
behavior in our model does produce convergence to approximate equilibrium prices after several periods of trading. The contrast between the
outcome of the simulations of the ZI model and that of our model identify
the effect on market convergence of belief formation and myopic surplus
maximization in our model. From the graphs and the statistics, it is clear
that this effect is substantial. Moreover, data on mean absolute deviation
in Table II show not only that our model converges to within a few cents of
the equilibrium price, but that the rate of convergence is similar to}although initially slightly faster than}that found in laboratory experiments.
Shifting Conditions
The diagram on the left of Fig. 7 shows two sets of supply and demand
conditions. The lower set, shown with thicker lines labeled S and D, is
identical to the supply and demand conditions in Fig. 2 and Fig. 5. If after
several periods of trading, buyers have each valuation increased by 0.50
and sellers have the cost of each unit increased by 0.50, then the new
supply and demand are those shown with thinner lines in Fig. 7. The
equilibrium quantity of trade and the total surplus are unaffected by this
shift, but the equilibrium price increases from 2.35 to 2.85. Since expectations focus near the original equilibrium after several periods of trading
Žsee Fig. 6., the dynamics of movement to the new equilibrium can be
examined by considering this type of market. The sequence of transaction
6
Although the mean absolute deviation in the last two periods of the ZI model simulations
is less than in the first two periods, this is not the result of convergence. The price sequence
in each period constitutes a draw from the same distribution.
7
The timing specification employed in the simulations is given in equations Ž14. and Ž15..
In one alternative tested, all agents with positive surplus were equally likely to send a
message. This resulted in higher variance in transaction prices and in more instability in the
outcomes.

26

GJERSTAD AND DICKHAUT

FIGURE 7

prices from a simulation of our model in this type of market}with the
shift occurring after five periods of trading}is shown on the right side of
Fig. 7. From periods 6 through 10 in this market, the equilibrium price is
2.85. In the simulation shown, convergence to the original equilibrium
occurs by the end of period 2. Beginning in period 6, the equilibrium price
shifts up 0.50. By the end of the period 7, transaction prices establishes
near the new equilibrium price. This simulation shows that in the model
developed here, traders respond to shifting market parameters, and prices
quickly adjust to a new equilibrium.
3.4. Boundaries on Performance
Although we have developed a model that simultaneously converges to
competitive equilibrium prices, produces efficient outcomes, and responds
quickly to altered market conditions, we want to indicate a direction for
improvement in the outcomes of the bargaining behavior developed in our
model. We do so by describing a distinctive feature of price sequences
from experimental markets.
N
We split the sequence Ž pn . ns1
into two subsequences, one consisting of
those exchange prices Ž pn . ng Ns that were initially proposed by the selling
side of the market, and the other consisting of the transaction prices
Ž pn . ng N that were proposed initially by the buying side. We provide
b
evidence that in laboratory experiments, the mean of Ž pn . ng Ns is greater
than the mean of Ž pn . ng N b. Yet in simulation of our model, this pattern is
reversed. This observation allows us to evaluate behavior in the model and
uncover a key difference between the behavior of laboratory subjects and
behavior in the model, providing direction for further research on bargaining behavior in DA markets.
In laboratory trading experiments, there is a clear difference between
mean prices of trades initiated by sellers and those initiated by buyers. For

PRICE FORMATION IN DOUBLE AUCTIONS

27

example, in the seven symmetric markets we consider, Table III shows the
market equilibrium price for each of these experiments in column 2 and
the mean difference of transaction price from the equilibrium in column 3.
Column 4 shows the mean difference between the transaction price and
equilibrium price for all trades initially proposed by sellers. Column 5
shows the same statistics for all trades initially proposed by buyers. Note
that in each of these seven experiments, the transactions initiated by
sellers have a higher mean price than those initiated by buyers. Two
additional data sets}one involving over 11, 000 trades}are examined by
Gjerstad Ž1995. and this price difference is a feature of all markets in both
data sets considered there. In simulations of our model we find that this
feature is reversed, and as a result, we are able to discern a different
between the bargaining behavior of laboratory subjects and behavior in the
model.
Consider again the belief functions pŽ a. and q Ž b . shown in Fig. 6. In
the description of the beliefs in these graphs in Section 3.3, we note that at
the beginning of a period, sellers in this market with these beliefs will all
have an optimal offer of 2.33 and buyers’ optimal bids will all be 2.35. At
the beginning of the third period, the first action will be either an ask of
2.33 or a bid at 2.35. Suppose that the first action is a bid of 2.35. As a
result of the spread reduction rule, buyers’ bids must be greater than 2.35.
A bid of 2.36 would result in an expected surplus Ž ¨ j2 y 2.36. ? 1 for each
of the four buyers in this market. Since the distribution of costs and
valuations at the beginning of each period in this market is symmetric, and
since the probability of each trader being the next to send a message is
equal to that trader’s proportion of total surplus Žsee Proposition 7., the
probability that a buyer will send the next message is approximately 0.50,
so that the probability of two consecutive bids is approximately 0.25, and in
this case the price will be above the equilibrium price. In general, the

TABLE III
Price Sequence and Subsequence Means in Symmetric Markets
Market

pe

p y pe

pa y pe

p b y pe

3pda01
2pda17
2pda20
2pda21
2pda24
2pda47
2pda53
Mean

$2.35
$6.20
$6.20
$5.30
$4.70
$6.35
$7.55

$0.04
$0.03
$0.06
y$0.03
$0.02
y$0.03
$0.00
$0.01

$0.12
$0.07
$0.12
y$0.01
$0.04
y$0.01
$0.01
$0.05

$0.01
$0.00
$0.01
y$0.04
y$0.02
y$0.05
y$0.02
y$0.02

28

GJERSTAD AND DICKHAUT

distribution of absolute deviations from equilibrium is approximately geometric, since a low price results from a sequence of asks and a high price
results from a sequence of bids. Recall that in Table III, the transactions
initiated by the selling side typically are above equilibrium, so the simulations and the laboratory markets lead to the opposite result in this respect.
While this is a subtle feature of DA data, a model that eliminates this
difference would capture fine aspects of bargaining behavior and would
represent progress in modeling behavior in this institution.

4. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we have defined beliefs for agents in a double auction
market that are generated endogenously on the basis of observed market
activity. An agent’s choice of an action depends only on these beliefs and
on that agent’s private information about his or her own costs or valuations. Agents who adopt the simple bargaining strategy of myopic expected
surplus maximization and employ these beliefs trade at prices that converge quickly and accurately to within several cents of the market equilibrium price and reach the competitive allocation. These beliefs and strategies are flexible enough to respond quickly to changes in supply and
demand conditions.
Laboratory market experiments dating back 35 years have demonstrated
that human subjects quickly and reliably reach competitive equilibrium
outcomes. The model developed in this paper demonstrates that this
capability of double auction market participants to reach competitive
equilibrium outcomes may result from simple, intuitive information processing and strategy choice. Since we know that laboratory subjects operate with limited information-processing capabilities and boundedly rational
strategy choices, this finding resolves, at least for the class of environments
considered here, the puzzle Hayek posed.

REFERENCES
Cason, T. N., and Friedman, D. Ž1993.. ‘‘An empirical analysis of price formation in double
auction markets,’’ in The Double Auction Market: Institutions, Theories, and E¨ idence ŽD.
Friedman and J. Rust, Eds.., pp. 253]283. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Cason, T. N., and Friedman D. Ž1996.. ‘‘Price formation in double auction markets,’’ J.
Econom. Dynam. Control 20, 1307]1337.
Easley, D., and Ledyard, J. Ž1993.. ‘‘Theories of Price Formation and Exchange in Double
Oral Auctions,’’ in The Double Action Market: Institutions, Theories, and E¨ idence ŽD.
Friedman and J. Rust, Eds.., pp. 63]97. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

PRICE FORMATION IN DOUBLE AUCTIONS

29

Friedman, D. Ž1991.. ‘‘A Simple Testable Model of Price Formation in the Double Auction
Market,’’ J. Econom. Beha¨ ior Organization 15, 47]70.
Gjerstad, S. ‘‘Price Formation in Double Auctions,’’ Ph.D. Thesis, University of Minnesota,
1995.
Gjerstad, S., and Shachat, J. Ž1996.. ‘‘A General Equilibrium Structure for Induced Supply
and Demand,’’ UCSD Discussion Paper no. 96]35, October 1996.
Gode, D., and Sunder, S. Ž1993.. ‘‘Allocative Efficiency of Markets with Zero Intelligence
Traders: Market as a Partial Substitute for Individual Rationality,’’ J. Political Economy
101, 119]137.
Hurwicz, L., Radner, R., and Reiter, S. Ž1975.. ‘‘A Stochastic Decentralized Resource
Allocation Process: Part I,’’ Econometrica 43, 363]393.
Hurwicz, L. Ž1972.. ‘‘On Informationally Decentralized Systems,’’ in Decision and Organization ŽC. B. McGuire and R. Radner, Eds.., pp. 297]336. Minnesota: Univ. of Minnesota
Press.
Ketcham, J., Smith, L., and Williams, A. W. Ž1984.. ‘‘A Comparison of Posted-Offer and
Double Auction Pricing Institutions,’’ Re¨ . Econom. Stud. 51, 595]614.
Plott, C. Ž1982.. ‘‘Industrial Organization Theory and Experimental Economics,’’ J. Econom.
Literature 20, 1485]1527.
Smith, V. L. Ž1962.. ‘‘An Experimental Study of Competitive Market Behavior,’’ J. Political
Economy 70, 111]137.
Smith, V. L. Ž1982.. ‘‘Microeconomic Systems as an Experimental Science,’’ Amer. Econom.
Re¨ . 72, 923]955.
Wilson, R. B. Ž1987.. ‘‘On Equilibria of Bid-Ask Markets,’’ in Arrow and the Ascent of Modern
Economic Theory ŽG. W. Feiwel, Ed.., pp. 375]414. New York: New York Univ. Press.

